TO ORDER.
&gt;&gt; WELCOME EVERYONE TO THE
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 19TH TWENTY
TWENTY TWO ELECTRONIC MEETING
OF THE NRA TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY TO PROTECT
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.
WE WILL CONDUCT THIS MEETING
SIMILARLY TO AN IN-PERSON
MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND ENTER MEETING ID NINE
SIX ZERO TWO TWO THREE TWO
EIGHT TWO ZERO ZERO OR JOIN VIA
THE ZOOME LINK.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE AGENDA AND THE
PUBLIC NOTICES SECTION OF THE
CITY WEBSITE AND ON THE
BROADCAST OF THIS MEETING
RAYMONDE IS NOW GOING TO CALL
THE
THANK YOU MOLLY AS A
REMINDER WHEN I CALL YOUR NAME
PLEASE INDICATE WHETHER YOU ARE
HERE OR NOT AND FROM WHERE YOU
ARE DIALING IN FROM.
ALL RIGHT, COMMISSIONER VOLANT
,I AM HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER BRIGS, YOUR
COUNCIL MEMBER MR. BROMAN HERE
IN ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER TOMOKI HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER HALK HERE FROM
HOUR.
COMMISSIONER KEILLER DENHA FROM
OUR COMMISSIONER KLEINERMAN
HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
COMMISSIONER LEIGH OR I&apos;M SORRY
COMMISSIONER YANG IF MY
NEIGHBOR OH AND THEN
COMMISSIONER LI SORRY I&apos;M
GETTING CONFUSED AND THEN
COMMISSIONER ONE CALL
COMMISSIONER HESS&apos;S HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER
HUTCHINSON HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
.
I DID GET REGRET&apos;S FROM
COMMISSIONER MARKOPOULOS AGAIN
LIEUTENANT MIKE SCHERBA AND HE
IS IN THE ATTENDEES SO I JUST
PROMOTED HIM.
HE IS HERE AREAS LIEUTENANT
SCHERBA THANK YOU, MIKE FROM
TORONTO TO YOU.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
AND WE DO HAVE CHAIR AH WE DO
HAVE A QUORUM OF THREE.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP, WE HAVE APPROVAL
OF THE CONSENT AGENDA.
SO THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL
OF TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA AND
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES.
SO IF WE WANT TO MODIFY
TONIGHT&apos;S SHOW WE WOULD HAVE TO
DO IT NOW.
&gt;&gt; YES, PETE, I WOULD LIKE TO
ADD A TOPIC TO TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA
TOPIC IS TO RESCIND SUPPORT
OF THE PLAN FOR SEVEN TO REVIEW
THAT WE APPROVED IN LAST
MONTH&apos;S MEETING.
OK, SO ANY QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
THOUGHTS ABOUT BRINGING THAT
ITEM BACK?
I THINK THAT&apos;S HOW WE DO THIS
.
I WAS JUST GONNA SUGGEST
PUTTING IT AFTER THE STATE AND
HEALTH PROJECT IF THAT MAKES
SENSE.
&gt;&gt; I THINK IF WE&apos;RE TAKING A
VOTE WE SHOULD WE HAVE TO PUT
IT IN THE BUSINESS SECTION
OF THE AGENDA.
&gt;&gt; MAYBE THAT&apos;S MAYBE THAT&apos;S
JUST AN ORGANIZATIONAL THING
RAYMOND DOES THAT I WOULD
PROBABLY RECOMMEND THAT MOLLY
JUST I THINK FOR THE REASON
THAT YOU CITE SINCE IT IS IT
WILL BE KIND OF A FORMAL ACTION
ITEM STATEMENT ELORZA
INFORMATION SO IT CAN EITHER GO
BEFORE OR AFTER YOUR ONE
BUSINESS ITEM IS THE BICYCLE
FACILITY MAINTENANCE.
ALL RIGHT.
LET&apos;S PUT IT AFTER THE BIKE
FACILITY MAINTENANCE ITEM
AND
THEN WE I GUESS WE NEED A
MOTION TO ADD IT TO THE AGENDA
AND THEN WE VOTE ON ADDING IT
TO THE AGENDA.
&gt;&gt; I BELIEVE.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
SO CAN I GET A MOTION TO BRING
BACK THE 7TH AND GREENVIEW
PROJECT FOR DISCUSSION POSSIBLE
RESCINDING OF THE
RECOMMENDATION ONTO THE AGENDA
AND I SEE AGAIN SECOND ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR OF BRINGING IT
BACK PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
OR SAY YES.
YES, GREAT.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED ANY
ABSTENTIONS?
GREAT MOTION PASSES
UNANIMOUSLY.
SO WE HAVE NOW AMENDED
TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA.
ANY OTHER CHANGES TO THE AGENDA
OR CONSENT AGENDA?
OK, SO NOW WE NEED TO APPROVE
THE CONSENT AGENDA.
&gt;&gt; SO CAN I GET A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
AMENDED
DULY SECONDED BY BRET
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PHYSICALLY
RAISE YOUR HAND OR SAY YES.
YES ALL THOSE OPPOSED.
OK AGENDA PASSES.
THANKS EVERYONE.
&gt;&gt; NEXT UP, IT&apos;S TIME FOR
PUBLIC COMMENT.
SO THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX
THREE THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN
TWO THREE AND UNDER I.D. NUMBER
NINE SIX ZERO TWO TWO THREE TWO
EIGHT TWO ZERO ZERO OR CONNECT
I ASSUME AS DESCRIBED ON THE
AGENDA CITY STAFF WILL SELECT
CALLERS WHO HAVE RAISED THEIR
HAND BY USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR
YOUR ZOOM ID IN ORDER TO RAISE
YOUR HAND TO INDICATE YOUR
DESIRE TO SPEAK PLEASE PRESS
STAR NINE ON YOUR PHONE OR
SELECT A RAISE HAND BUTTON IN
ZOOM YOU WILL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK.
DO YOU HAVE ANY PUBLIC COMMENTS
TONIGHT?
YOUR MUTED WE DO INDEED SEE A
COUPLE OF HANDS RAISED.
THE FIRST IS ADAM GOODMAN.
ADAM, I HAVE TAKEN YOU OR
PROMOTED YOU TO ALLOW TO SPEAK
GO ON.
&gt;&gt; MEET YOURSELF ON THE FLOOR
IS YOURS.
THANKS, ADAM GOODMAN.
I&apos;M CALLING IN FROM THE WEST
SIDE OF BANABA.
I WANT TO TALK ABOUT THE STATE
AND HILL PROJECT AND MOST
MOSTLY ABOUT THE SECTION
OF STATE S HEADING SOUTH FROM
HOOVER.
SO THIS IS IN TWO DIFFERENT
CITY PLANNING DOCUMENTS THAT
SAY THAT THIS SHOULD HAVE AN
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
PROTECTED BIKEWAY ON IT.
BOTH THE COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND THE
TREE LINE MASTER PLAN AND I
PERSONALLY THINK THIS IS
JUSTIFIED AS WELL BECAUSE THAT
HOOVER IS KIND OF WHEN PARALLEL
ROUTES STOP EXISTING YOU LOOK
AT THE DIVISION BIKEWAY IS
GOING TO END AND HOOVER HEADING
SOUTH BECAUSE DIVISION ENDS
THERE.
THEY&apos;VE GOT KIND OF THIS BIG
BLOB.
THEY USE THE ATHLETIC CAMPUS
THERE.
THAT&apos;S A BARRIER TO GETTING
THROUGH SO A PLAN THAT WAS
PRESENTED TO YOU ALL EARLIER I
THINK IT WAS IN JUNE YOU THE
CONCEPT AT LEAST WAS WAS
SHOWING REMOVING THE PARKING
ALONG THAT STRETCH AND
INSTALLING PROTECTED BIKE LANES
WITH WITH DELINEATOR OR
BOLLARDS OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
.
&gt;&gt; IT I BELIEVE THE PLAN THAT&apos;S
COMING TO YOU TONIGHT HAS
DECIDED NOT TO DO THAT AND
INSTEAD KEEPING THE PARKING
INTACT AND ONLY PUTTING PAINTED
BUFFORD BIKE LANES AND I&apos;M
USING THE TERM BUFFORD LOOSELY
BECAUSE THERE&apos;S REALLY NOT MUCH
OF THE BUFFER SO IN ORDER TO
MAKE THIS FIT ACTUALLY YOU&apos;RE
DOING WE&apos;RE DOING THINGS THAT
GO KIND OF AGAINST FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION AND
GUIDANCE NAMELY COUNTING THE
KIRPAN AS PART OF A BIKE LANE
THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S NOT WHAT THEY
RECOMMENDED.
SO YOU KNOW, WHY WHY WHY IS
WHERE THE CHANGE HAPPENED?
I KNOW WE HAVE OUR WINTER
PROBLEM.
I APPRECIATE THAT YOU&apos;RE
TALKING ABOUT THAT TONIGHT TOO.
BUT YOU KNOW, IF IF WE&apos;RE
THINKING THAT WE CAN JUST GO
BACK IN AND STICK IN THE
DELINEATOR LATER, I THINK
THAT&apos;S WRONG.
I ACTUALLY SAID THIS IN AN
EMAIL I SENT TO THE COMMISSION
ABOUT OUR DIFFERENT PROJECT THE
SEVENTH GREENVIEW ONE.
BUT WHEN YOU&apos;VE GOT STREET
PARKING THE DESIGN HAS TO
CHANGE WHEN YOU SWITCH FROM
BUFFORD BIKE LANES TO PROTECT
BIKE LANES AND I&apos;M NOT EVEN
SURE THERE&apos;S ENOUGH FOR THAT ON
THIS STRETCH OF ROAD ANYWAY.
SO OF COURSE YOU COULD COME
BACK AND RESHAPE EVERYTHING
LATER BUT THAT&apos;S NOT FREE.
SO IT SEEMS LIKE NOW IT&apos;S
REALLY THE BEST TIME TO TO
CONSIDER MAKING A CHANGE LIKE
THIS.
ALSO I&apos;D SAY I BIKE THE STRETCH
LIKE AT LEAST TWICE A WEEK AND
THAT PARALLEL PARKING SOUTH
OF HOOVER IT&apos;S USUALLY ALMOST
EMPTY.
SO ANOTHER QUESTION IS WHY WHY
ARE WE LEAVING THERE AND WHO
BENEFITS?
&gt;&gt; I GUESS I&apos;D SURMISE THAT
MAYBE IT&apos;S GOOD FOR THE
UNIVERSITY WHEN THEY&apos;RE HOLDING
CERTAIN EVENTS THERE.
SO OK, I KNOW THE TREE LINE
FOLKS WANTED TO RUN A PATHWAY
RIGHT THROUGH THE ATHLETIC
CAMPUS INSTEAD OF ON STATE
STREET AND THIS EVEN CAME UP
SOME OF THE DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
THIS PROJECT.
BUT THE YOU GAVE THEM THE STIFF
ARM WHEN THEY PROPOSED THIS
IDEA WHICH IS WHY THE MASTER
PLAN SAYS BUT IT SAYS SO IF
IT&apos;S THE UNIVERSITY THAT
BENEFITS FROM HAVING ALL THE
STREET INTACT, THEN MAYBE
THAT&apos;S A WE NEED TO USE TO GET
THEM BACK TO THE TABLE TO TALK
ABOUT BUILDING THE TREE LINE
THE WAY THAT THE CONSERVANCY
ACTUALLY HAS ALWAYS WANTED TO
DO IT RIGHT.
I DON&apos;T THINK WE SHOULD JUST
GIVE THAT AWAY SO I DON&apos;T KNOW
THE REST OF THIS PROJECT.
I THINK IT&apos;S OK.
IT&apos;S IT&apos;S MAKING A LOT
OF COMPROMISES BUT ULTIMATELY
IT&apos;S AN IMPROVEMENT.
GOOD WORK.
BUT JUST THIS PARTICULAR
STRETCH SOUTH OF HOOVER YOU
THERE&apos;S SO MUCH IN OUR EXISTING
CITY PLANS THAT SAY WHAT SHOULD
GO THERE AND WE&apos;RE NOT DOING
IT.
I REALLY THINK THIS IS NOT
MEETING OUR OUR CITY&apos;S STATED
GOALS AND VALUES.
SO YOU KNOW, I HOPE THERE&apos;S AN
OPPORTUNITY TO CHANGE COURSE.
THANK YOU.
OTHER PUBLIC COMMENTS.
&gt;&gt; YES.
NEXT WE HAVE KEN CLARK CAN I&apos;VE
GONE AHEAD AND ALLOWED YOU TO
SPEAK THE GOING ON MEET
YOURSELF ON THE FLOOR IS YOURS
.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
I&apos;M KEN CLARK.
I LIVED FOR NINE SEVEN LARKSPUR
STREET.
I&apos;M CALLING FROM HOME SO I
FIRST WANT TO GREATLY
APPRECIATE CHAIR CLEMENS
REPEATING OF THE CONNECTION
INFORMATION.
I&apos;VE HAD A LOT OF TROUBLE WITH
THAT IN THE PAST WHEN I&apos;M ON A
COTTON VIDEO STREAM OF THE
MEETING AND IT&apos;S VERY, VERY
DIFFICULT TO GET ALL OF THOSE
NUMBERS IN FAST ENOUGH TO BE
ABLE TO COMMENT IF YOU COULD
ACTUALLY EVEN CONSIDER
REPEATING IT MORE SLOWLY A
THIRD TIME AT THE VERY
BEGINNING MEETING TO TRY AND
HELP PEOPLE GET ON BOARD.
I THINK THERE ARE MORE PEOPLE
WHO WOULD LIKE TO COMMENT AT
THESE MEETINGS THAN ACTUALLY
GET A CHANCE A LOT OF THE TIME
BECAUSE THAT&apos;S A VERY DIFFICULT
STREAM OF NUMBERS TO TRY AND
GET IN QUICKLY.
I WANT TO CALL YOUR ATTENTION
TO ADAM GOODMANS LETTER THAT HE
SENT.
I DO HOPE THAT THE COMMISSION
MEMBERS ARE READING THE MAIL
THAT YOU&apos;RE GETTING.
I TRIED TO SEND THINGS IN THE
PAST AND IT&apos;S NOT CLEAR TO ME
THAT ANYBODY ACTUALLY READS ANY
OF IT.
HE MADE A VERY, VERY EXCELLENT
WELL PRESENTED SET OF ARGUMENTS
WITH DIAGRAMS SHOWING SOME
THINGS THAT YOU SHOULD CONSIDER
FOR THE WHICH ACTUAL PROJECT
THAT WAS.
BUT IT&apos;S EXCELLENT AND I WOULD
HOPE THAT THE COMMISSION
MEMBERS HAVE A CHANCE TO SEE
THAT LETTER AND ARE CAREFUL TO
PAY ATTENTION TO CORRESPONDENCE
LIKE THAT COMING FROM MEMBERS
THE PUBLIC.
I HAVE A COUPLE OF COMMENTS ON
THE ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
NETWORK.
I&apos;M I THINK YOU WOULD CONSIDER
ME A VERY ABLE ALTHOUGH I DON&apos;T
CYCLIST I&apos;M VERY CONCERNED THAT
THE THE WAY THAT FEEDBACK HAS
BEEN SOLICITED FROM A BIKING
COMMUNITY TENDS TO NEGLECT THE
COMMENTS OF LONG TERM CYCLISTS
WHO HAVE BEEN DEALING WITH
CONDITIONS FOR A LONG TIME HAVE
VERY GOOD I THINK SUGGESTIONS
FOR HOW TO FIX THE PROBLEMS WE
HAVE AND THEY&apos;RE GETTING SHORT
SHRIFT.
THEY&apos;RE GETTING PATRONIZING
TREATMENT THAT WHAT&apos;S IMPORTANT
HERE IS PEOPLE WHO HAVE NEVER
BIKE BEFORE BUT WE&apos;VE BEEN
DOING IT.
WE KNOW THE WHAT THE PROBLEMS
ARE.
WE SEE THEM ALL THE TIME.
ONE THAT ADAM GOODMAN POINTED
OUT IN HIS LETTER.
HE POINTED OUT IT OUT IS THAT
PROTECTED BIKE LANES ARE
SUPPOSED TO BE INVIOLATE.
MOTORS ARE NEVER SUPPOSED TO BE
DRIVING PROTECTED BIKE LANES.
I WOULD I WOULD EXPAND ON THAT.
THE IDEA OF BIKE LANES IS THAT
MOTORISTS NEVER EVER DRIVE IN
BIKE LANES AT ALL EVER ANYWHERE
PERIOD.
THE WHOLE POINT OF BIKE LANES
IS THAT IT&apos;S SUPPOSED TO BE FOR
CYCLISTS ONLY A MOTORIST SHOULD
NEVER IMPINGE ON THEM EVER.
WE HAVE REAL PROBLEMS WITH THAT
IN ANN ARBOR.
WE DON&apos;T SEEM TO EVER ENFORCE
THAT.
WE DO A BAD JOB OF MAKING SURE
THAT IT&apos;S CLEAR TO PEOPLE THAT
THE BIKE LANE IS A FACILITY FOR
CYCLISTS ONLY NOT EVER
MOTORISTS AND A PARTICULAR I&apos;D
LIKE TO SEE A LOT MORE OF THE
SEPARATED TREATMENTS THE
BOLLARDS, PLASTIC BREAKAWAY
BOLLARDS AND POSSIBLY A CHANGE
OR ORDINANCE WHICH REALLY IS
ONE OF THE WORST IN THE MIDWEST
FOR PROTECTING CYCLISTS IN BIKE
LANE.
I APPRECIATE YOUR ATTENTION AND
THE WORK YOU GUYS DO.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER PUBLIC COMMENTS?
&gt;&gt; YES, I HAVE ANOTHER FROM
ERIC C. AND ERIC, THERE ARE ALL
RIGHT.
OK, ERIC, I HAVE GONE AHEAD
PERMITTED YOU TO SPEAK GO AHEAD
AND LIMIT YOURSELF FROM THE
FLOOR.
&gt;&gt; IS YOURS MY COMING THROUGH
OK YOU ARE INDEED.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU SO MUCH.
SO I JUST WANTED TO ECHO A
LITTLE BIT OF WHAT ADAM AND KEN
JUST SAID ABOUT YOU ALL AGES
ROOTS DOWNTOWN I&apos;VE GOT TWO
KIDS.
ONE IS TEN.
ONE IS SEVEN.
I WOULD CONSIDER THEM REALLY I
DON&apos;T KNOW I&apos;M UNCOMFORTABLE
WITH HOW AGGRESSIVE LIKE
BICYCLISTS THEY ARE SO THEY ARE
VERY CONFIDENT BICYCLISTS.
BUT AS A PARENT I AM JUST NOT
COMFORTABLE WITH MOST OF THE
QUOTE UNQUOTE ALL AGES ALL
ABILITIES BIKE ROUTES DOWNTOWN
NOT IN NOT EVEN GETTING TO THE
ONES THAT ARE OUT BY WHERE I
LIVE UP IN THE SECOND WARD.
SO WHEN I LOOK AT THE PROJECT
THAT&apos;S PROPOSED LIKE STAYTON
HILL I&apos;M ALWAYS THINKING OF HOW
CAN I TAKE MY KIDS HOW CAN I GO
THROUGH THESE AREAS SAFELY?
AND WHEN I LOOK AT THE PROPOSAL
WITH THE PARKING ON THE STREET
WITH A VERY, VERY SMALL BIKE
LANE THAT INCLUDES RIDING IN
THE GUTTER FOR PORTIONS OF IT,
NO PROTECTION PROVIDED AT ALL
FOR BICYCLISTS I THINK WOULD I
GO ON THAT BIKE LANE WITH MY
KIDS?
WOULD I FEEL SAFE WITH MY KIDS?
AND THE ANSWER IS ABSOLUTELY
NOT.
I MEAN THERE&apos;S JUST NO WAY THAT
I WOULD FEEL SAFE GOING ON
STATE WITH THE PROPOSED PROJECT
AS
IT&apos;S BEING PUT FORTH TODAY.
SO I JUST REALLY FEEL LIKE WE
SHOULD BE LOOKING AT THAT.
THERE&apos;S MORE THAN TEN THOUSAND
VEHICLES A DAY ON THAT STRETCH
AND OUR OWN GUIDELINES SAY THAT
WHEN THERE&apos;S THAT MANY THAT
MUCH TRAFFIC WE SHOULD BE ONLY
DOING PROTECTED SEPARATE BIKE
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO WHY WHY ARE WE NOT LOOKING
AT THAT FOR THIS SECTION SO I
REALLY ENCOURAGE YOU TO LOOK AT
THIS FROM THE FROM THE ASPECT
OF WHO&apos;S GOING TO BE ABLE TO
USE THIS, WHAT ABILITIES ARE
GOING TO BE ENCOURAGED AND WHY
ARE WE DOING IT THE WAY THAT
WE&apos;RE DOING IT?
WHO ARE WHO IS THIS BENEFITING?
I THINK THAT&apos;S A REALLY GOOD
QUESTION.
WHO IS THIS NEW DESIGN
BENEFITING?
IS IT THE BENEFITING THE USERS
THAT WE WANT TO ENCOURAGE OR IS
IT BENEFITING THIRD PARTY WHO
NEEDS TO PARK THEIR THAT&apos;S
BASICALLY IT.
I REALLY DO APPRECIATE THE
ATTENTION TO DETAIL ON THESE
AND I APPRECIATE SOLICITING THE
FEEDBACK OF THE USERS.
I WANT TO GET TO A POINT WHERE
WE CAN SAFELY BIKE AS A FAMILY
DOWNTOWN AND LIKE KEN SAID, ONE
OF THE BEST ONE OF THE BIGGEST
REASONS I DON&apos;T FEEL SAFE THAT
WAY IS THAT THERE&apos;S JUST SO
MANY PEOPLE PARKED IN THE BIKE
LANES.
THERE&apos;S VERY, VERY LITTLE
ENFORCEMENT.
THERE&apos;S VERY LITTLE EDUCATION
TO PEOPLE THAT ARE DRIVING
THROUGH THESE BIKE LANES AND
IT&apos;S JUST IT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT
WE COULD GET THERE BUT WE DO
HAVE TO COMMIT TO IT SO I
APPRECIATE YOUR TIME TONIGHT
AND THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; ANY OTHER PUBLIC COMMENTS?
YES, WE NEXT WE HAVE ADAM ADAM
I HAVE GONE AHEAD AND ENABLE
YOU TO SPEAK GO AHEAD TO MEET
YOURSELF AND THEN THE FLOOR IS
YOURS.
HI THIS IS ADAM.
JUST GIVE IT TO HIM IN THE
FOURTH WARD AND LAS VEGAS DRIVE
I I WAS GOING TO SPEAK TODAY
ABOUT THE THERE WAS A
PEDESTRIAN EDUCATION SURVEY
EMAIL THING THAT WENT OUT BUT
IT LOOKS LIKE THAT&apos;S BEEN
THAT&apos;S BEEN TAKEN DOWN AT THIS
POINT.
SO I WAS JUST GOING TO KIND
OF MENTION HOW DISAPPOINTED I
AM AND THAT WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT
PEDESTRIAN EDUCATION WHEN I
MEAN WE ALL KNOW TO LOOK BOTH
WAYS BEFORE CROSSING THE ROAD
AND GOT YADDA YADDA BUT LIKE
ITS DRIVERS THAT HAVE THE
RESPONSIBILITY BECAUSE YOU KNOW
,THEY CAN HURT OTHER PEOPLE IF
I&apos;M WALKING AROUND LIKE I&apos;M NOT
GOING TO YOU KNOW, ROLL OVER A
CAR BY WALKING INTO IT OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO I THINK WE JUST NEED TO
BE CAREFUL ABOUT THAT KIND
OF YOU KNOW, SUPPORTING THAT
KIND OF RHETORIC.
BUT YOU I WANTED TO SUPPORT
SOME OF THE OTHER THE OTHER
CALLERS ABOUT THE STATE STREET
BIKE LANES.
I DO OCCASIONALLY IF I&apos;M NOT
REALLY FEELING LIKE BIKING ON
STADIUM PASSED THE TEST THE
STADIUM I&apos;LL TAKE DENHA CROSS
AND AND HOOVER AND THEN COME
DOWN STATE AND YOU IT&apos;S IT&apos;S
NOT GREAT.
IT&apos;S YOU KNOW COULD BE BETTER
AND I WAS KIND OF HOPING TO SEE
PROTECTED BIKE LANES THERE SO
THAT&apos;S KIND OF KIND
OF DISAPPOINTING AND THE THE
IDEA OF HAVING CARS GO ACROSS
THE BIKE LANE TO PARK IS YOU
KNOW IS IT&apos;S JUST NOT THAT
GOOD.
SO I&apos;M HOPING WE CAN WE CAN GET
AWAY FROM THAT AND YOU KNOW,
PRIORITIZE VULNERABLE ROAD
USERS OVER PARKED CARS.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
STOP MY ARMS.
THAT DOESN&apos;T GO OFF ANY OTHER
PUBLIC COMMENTS.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE ONE MORE.
THE PHONE NUMBER ENDS AND THE
DIGITS SIX ONE SEVEN.
I&apos;VE GONE AHEAD AND ALLOWED YOU
TO SPEAK GO AHEAD YOURSELF
CALLER WITH SIX ONE SEVEN HIS
LAST THREE DIGITS AND THE FLOOR
IS YOURS.
HELLO, THIS IS JONATHAN LEVINE.
I&apos;M CALLING FROM THE FIRST WARD
AND I WANTED TO ECHO THE
SENTIMENTS OF THE PREVIOUS
CALLERS AND DO A COUPLE MORE
THINGS I&apos;D LIKE TO CONNECT THE
VISION FOR A STATE STREET
BICYCLE LANE TO THE LAND USE
PLANS AT AT STATE AND
EISENHAUER.
SO WE&apos;VE REZONE STATE AND
EISENHAUER TRANSIT FRIENDLY
ZONES SO THE VISION FOR THE
FUTURE AS A TRANSIT VILLAGE AT
STATE AND EISENHOWER GRANTED
VILLAGE AND STATE AND
EISENHAUER NEEDS IN ADDITION TO
THE TO TRANSIT CONNECTION TO A
CENTRAL CAMPUS AND TRANSIT
CONNECTION NEEDS A SOLID AND
CONTINUOUS AND NOT OUT BIKE
LANE THAT OFFERS PEOPLE ANOTHER
WAY OF GETTING FROM HERE TO
THERE.
I WAS DISAPPOINTED WHEN WHEN
THE PLANS WERE A TWO WAY
SEPARATE AND PROTECTED LANE
WERE ABANDONED IN PART BECAUSE
I SAW THE SEPARATED AND
PROTECTED LANE AS KIND OF A
STATEMENT THAT THAT WE REALLY
ARE COMMITTED AND WE&apos;RE GOING
TO BE HAVING A SOLID LANE GOING
ALL THE WAY DOWN TO THE SOUTH
END OF TOWN.
IT WAS ALMOST FORESEEABLE ONCE
ONCE THE SEPARATE AND PROTECTED
LANE WAS ABANDONED FOR REASONS
THAT I DISAGREED WITH THAT THE
LANES WOULD BECOME LESS AND
LESS AND NOW WE WERE EVEN
TALKING ABOUT UNPROTECTED LANES
WHICH DON&apos;T MATCH THE STANDARD
OF WHAT WE&apos;VE COMMITTED TO
OURSELVES IN DIVISION ZERO.
AND SO I WOULD URGE I WOULD
ACTUALLY URGE RECONSIDERATION
OF THE OF THE TWO WAY SEPARATED
AND PROTECTED LANES AND AT A
MINIMUM A FULLY PROTECTED ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES LANE GOING
DOWN DOWN STATE STREET WITH THE
VISION THAT ULTIMATELY IT WILL
GO TO THE SOUTH END OF TOWN.
THANK THANK YOU TO THE ALL OVER
AGAIN ANY OTHER PUBLIC COMMENTS
AND NOT SEEING OTHERS.
&gt;&gt; WE DO HAVE A FAIR NUMBER
OF OTHER CALLERS PEOPLE DIALED
IN SO MAYBE ONE LAST CALL IF
ANYBODY WANTS TO SPEAK DURING
PUBLIC COMMENT DURING THE
MEETING THAT WOULD BE IN TIME
TO DO SO.
&gt;&gt; PLEASE RAISE YOUR HAND AND
ZOOM OR ON YOUR PHONE.
ALL RIGHT, MOLLY, I&apos;M NOT
SEEING ANY THEIR HANDS POP UP.
&gt;&gt; THANKS.
THANKS EVERYONE WHO CALLED IN
TODAY.
SO MOVING ON TO BUSINESS AND
THE BICYCLE FACILITY
MAINTENANCE RESOLUTION.
SO AS WE DISCUSSED AT LAST
MONTH&apos;S MEETING, I SUGGESTED
THAT WE PROVIDE SOME DIRECTION
TO CITY LEADERSHIP AND CITY
COUNCIL TO ADDRESS THE ISSUES
THAT HE&apos;S BEEN HAVING AROUND
PROCURING EQUIPMENT THAT CAN
SWEEP AND PLOW PROTECTED BIKE
LANES.
SO AS WE ALL KNOW THAT MOVING
TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION ZERO
TRANSPORTATION PLAN CALLS FOR
AN ALL AGES AND ABILITIES BIKE
NETWORK.
WE&apos;VE ALREADY HEARD A FAIR BIT
ABOUT THAT TONIGHT BUT WE NEED
TO BE ABLE TO MAINTAIN THOSE
FACILITIES WHEN THEY GET BUILT.
SO I DRAFTED A RESOLUTION WHICH
WENT INTO THE PACKET YESTERDAY
AND I WANTED TO OPEN UP THE
FLOOR FOR DISCUSSION ON THIS
RESOLUTION BUT I FIGURED I
WOULD JUST READ IT FIRST SO
THAT EVERYONE HAS IT FRESH IN
THEIR MINDS SO WHEREAS ANN
ARBOR IS MOVING TOGETHER TOWARD
ZERO COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN NAMES
PROTECTED BIKE LANES IS A KEY
TOOL FOR CREATING ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES BIKE ROUTES ON MAJOR
STREETS WHEREAS AND IS MOVING
TOGETHER TOWARD VISION ZERO
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN CALLS FOR INSTALLING FIVE
MILES OF NEW OR UPGRADED LOW
STRESS BIKE ROUTES EACH YEAR
WHEREAS ANN ARBOR CURRENTLY
ONLY HAS ONE POINT EIGHT MILES
OF PROTECTED BIKE LANE ALL
OF WHICH ARE IN THE DOWNTOWN
AND ALL OF WHICH ARE TWO WAY
FACILITIES LARGE ENOUGH FOR A
STANDARD SIZED SNOW PLOW AND
STREET SWEEPER WHEREAS THE
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION
COMMITTEE HAS IDENTIFIED FIVE
MAJOR STREETS AS TOP PRIORITY
CORRIDORS IN NEED OF LOW STRESS
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES BICYCLE
FACILITIES WHEREAS THE
ACQUISITION OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT
APPROPRIATE TO SWEEP AND PLOW
SINGLE DIRECTION PROTECTED BIKE
LANES IS CURRENTLY A MAJOR
BARRIER TO THE INSTALLATION
OF PROTECTED BIKE LANES
THROUGHOUT ANN ARBOR RESOLVED
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
REQUESTS BUT CITY COUNCIL
DIRECT THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
TO WORK WITH APPROPRIATE STAFF
TO DETERMINE DEPARTMENTAL
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
ACQUISITION OPERATION AND
MAINTENANCE OF SNOWPLOWS,
STREET SWEEPERS AND OTHER
EQUIPMENT NECESSARY FOR THE
YEAR ROUND OPERATION OF SINGLE
DIRECTION PROTECTED BIKE LANES
RESOLVED THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION REQUESTS THAT THE
UPCOMING BUDGET CYCLE CITY
COUNCIL ALLOCATE SUFFICIENT
FUNDS FOR THE ACQUISITION
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
OF SNOWPLOWS STREET SWEEPERS
AND OTHER EQUIPMENT NECESSARY
FOR THE YEAR ROUND OPERATION
OF SINGLE DIRECTION PROTECTED
BIKE LANES.
ALL RIGHT.
AND NOW I&apos;M GOING TO OPEN IT UP
FOR DISCUSSION I CAN GET THERE
WE GO THE WINDOW SO IF YOU WANT
TO SPEAK YOU CAN PLEASE USE THE
PHRASE HAND BUTTON IF YOU CAN
OR JUST A MUTE IF YOU ARE ON
AUDIO
.
PETE, I WOULD JUST LIKE TO SAY
THAT I LIKE THIS AS IT IS.
I&apos;M GOING TO BE SUPPORTING IT.
THANKS, JULIE.
&gt;&gt; HI.
&gt;&gt; SO I HAD JUST A LITTLE BIT
OF CONFUSION ABOUT THE THE NOW
WE HAVE THESE TWO BIKE LANES
DOWNTOWN WHICH ARE BIG ENOUGH
FOR THE EQUIPMENT THAT WE HAVE
AND THEN ARE WE WE&apos;RE
PROJECTING ARE WE ARE WE
PROJECTING SMALLER BIKE LANES
AND WE NEED EQUIPMENT FOR THAT
AND
THAT&apos;S WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKING
FOR.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, MY SO THE PART OF THE
REASON I BROUGHT THIS FORWARD
IS THAT THE AS WE&apos;VE BEEN
HAVING CONVERSATIONS ABOUT WELL
WHY WE SAID WE WANTED A
PROTECTED BIKE LANE HERE WE
SAID WE WANTED A PROTECTED BIKE
LANE THERE AND THE REASON THAT
WE&apos;VE BEEN HEARING THAT WE
CAN&apos;T PUT IN THESE PROTECTED
LANES YET IS THAT WE CAN&apos;T
MAINTAIN THEM THE SORT OF LIKE
SINGLE SIDE PROTECTED LANES.
AND SO AS WE TALKED ABOUT IT
MORE, I TALKED ABOUT IT WITH
RAYMOND THERE ARE SUPPLY CHAIN
ISSUES BUT THERE WAS ALSO THIS
ISSUE OF SORT OF INTERNAL LACK
OF CLARITY ABOUT WHICH
DEPARTMENT SHOULD BE
RESPONSIBLE BECAUSE THE THE
GENERAL POLICY IS NOT TO BUY
EQUIPMENT IF THERE&apos;S NOT ALSO A
PLAN TO REPLACE THE EQUIPMENT
AND MAINTAIN THE EQUIPMENT AND
SO THERE WITHOUT CLARITY AROUND
WHO WAS SUPPOSED TO BUY IT AND
MAINTAIN IT IN HIS BUDGET IT
WAS SUPPOSED TO GO INTO AND WHO
WAS SUPPOSED TO OPERATE THE
THINGS IT&apos;S BEEN IT&apos;S BEEN
THESE SORT OF HIDDEN BARRIERS
THAT HAVE BEEN PREVENTING FROM
GETTING THE EQUIPMENT WE NEED
AND THEREFORE PREVENTING US
FROM BUILDING THE PROTECTED
BIKE LANES THAT WE NEED.
AND SO THIS WAS MY ATTEMPT TO
TRY UNSNARL THAT A LITTLE BIT
AND ELEVATE IT TO COUNSEL TO
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR IN THE
HOPES THAT THEY COULD THAT
STAFF COULD GET SOME CLARITY
AND WE COULD BUY SOME SNOWPLOWS
AND BUILD THESE PROTECTED LANES
.
THANK YOU.
YEAH, ERICA.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I AGREE THAT THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT WE NEED TO SORT
OUT.
I&apos;M JUST CURIOUS IF STAFF HAS
ANY MORE FEEDBACK THAT THEY
WANT TO PROVIDE OR REACTIONS TO
THIS IN TERMS OF , YOU KNOW,
ANY OF THE CHALLENGES THAT
WE&apos;VE BEEN EXPERIENCING TO DATE
OR.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I I DID HAVE A CHANCE
TO VET THIS WITH PUBLIC WORKS
AND SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND I
THINK THEY ALL AGREE WITH THE
NEED FOR US TO TRY TO SOLVE FOR
I THINK TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION KIND OF ELEVATING
THE ISSUE IS PROBABLY A GOOD
THING FOR US TO DISCUSS.
SOME OF THE THINGS THAT MOLLY
DISCUSSED ARE KIND BACK END
ISSUES THAT WE KIND OF DEBATE
INTERNALLY TRYING TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO SOLVE FOR IT, YOU KNOW,
TO KIND OF BUILD OFF WHAT MOLLY
WAS SAYING TO ADDRESS JULIE&apos;S
QUESTION.
&gt;&gt; UM, THE ADVANTAGE WITH THE
CYCLE TRACKS THAT YOU SEE
DOWNTOWN IS THERE 10 FEET OR
MORE IN WIDTH?
SO THAT&apos;S THE WIDTH OF A TRAVEL
VEHICULAR TRAVELING.
SO THE SAME EQUIPMENT THAT&apos;S
USED TO SWEEP AND PLOW STREETS
CAN BE USED TO PLOW THOSE
FACILITIES.
BUT WE DON&apos;T ANTICIPATE THAT
WE&apos;LL BE ABLE TO PUT
BIDIRECTIONAL CYCLE TRACKS
EVERYWHERE.
YOU KNOW, A LOT OF WHAT WE&apos;RE
ENVISIONING IS RETROFITTING
EXISTING BIKE LANES, ESPECIALLY
ONES THAT ALREADY HAVE BUFFERS
WITH VERTICAL DELINEATOR
BECAUSE WE CAN DO THAT
RELATIVELY QUICKLY.
WE CAN DO A RELATIVELY CHEAPLY
BUT THEN IF WE PUT THOSE
VERTICAL DELINEATOR IN THEN
THERE&apos;S THIS ISSUE ABOUT
WHETHER WE CAN SWEEP THEM AND
PLOW THEM BECAUSE WE DON&apos;T HAVE
A SMALLER PIECE OF EQUIPMENT
THAT CAN DO THAT WORK.
SO I THINK YOU KNOW, THIS IS
WHAT MOLLY IS TRYING TO GET AT
AND IN IN TERMS OF THE
ELEVATING THE ISSUE, I THINK
THERE&apos;S ALSO A BUDGET
CONSIDERATION THAT WILL
PROBABLY COME BEFORE COUNCIL AS
PART OF THE NEXT BUDGET CYCLE
WHICH IS COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGG&apos;S
KNOWS.
WE&apos;RE COMING UP ON THE TWO YEAR
END AND BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY FOUR TWENTY FIVE THAT
BUDGET IS TO START DEVELOPMENT
HERE ANY DAY AND WE&apos;LL BE
BROUGHT TO COUNCIL IN MAY AND
SO KIND OF PUTTING THESE ISSUES
THE FOREFRONT ABOUT WHERE
COUNCIL&apos;S PRIORITIES ARE, WHERE
THE CITY&apos;S PRIORITIES ARE
AGAINST COMPETING INTERESTS I
THINK IS AN IMPORTANT
CONSIDERATION AND ONE THAT I
THINK WHY MOLLY WANTS TO KIND
OF PUT IT IN THE FOREFRONT FOR
DISCUSSION.
THAT&apos;S RIGHT.
AND I ALSO I WILL SORT
OF FOREGROUND IN THIS PREVIOUS
CONVERSATION WE HAD ALSO TALKED
ABOUT POTENTIALLY BRINGING A
RESOLUTION ABOUT THE ABOUT THE
BUDGET CYCLE ITSELF AND MAKING
SOME RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT
ALLOCATING MORE FUNDS TO BIKE
LANE AND OTHER KINDS
OF TRANSPORTATION NEEDS AND
WE&apos;LL BE BRINGING THAT NEXT
MONTH SO THERE WILL BE ANOTHER
IT&apos;LL BE A RESOLUTION THAT
SPEAKS DIRECTLY TO THE ISSUE
OF BUDGET PRIORITIES AND THAT&apos;S
BROADER THAN JUST THIS BIKE
LANE MAINTENANCE THING THAT I
WANTED TO TREAT THEM SEPARATELY
BECAUSE THEY FELT DISTINCT FROM
EACH OTHER, REP. THE WHOLE
THING THAT CAME TO MIND THOUGH
WAS I WONDER DO WE NEED TO
ADDRESS ANY ASPECT OF THE GREEN
FLEET IF DESIRE WITH THIS?
I I&apos;VE HEARD THAT THERE ARE
DRASTICALLY DIFFERENT LEAD
TIMES FOR PROCURING DIFFERENT
KINDS OF EQUIPMENT.
DO WE NEED TO URGE ONE OR THE
OTHER LEAVE THE OPTION OPEN?
DO WE NEED TO ADDRESS IT AT
ALL?
IT&apos;S JUST SOMETHING THAT POPPED
INTO MY HEAD.
IT&apos;S A GOOD QUESTION AND
RAYMOND, I&apos;D LOVE YOUR THOUGHTS
ON THAT.
I THINK THERE WAS SOME
SOMETHING ABOUT HOW THE
ELECTRIC ONES ARE GOING TO TAKE
EVEN LONGER TO GET TO TO BRET&apos;S
POINT, THE CITY NOW HAS A GREEN
FLEET POLICY WHERE WE WERE
TRYING TO TAKE ALL CITY
VEHICLES AND TRANSITION THEM
OVER TO ELECTRIC TO HELP MEET
OUR CARBON NEUTRALITY GOALS.
SO THIS PIECE OF EQUIPMENT
SINCE IT WOULD BE A NEW PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT WOULD FALL UNDER
THAT GREEN FLEET PROCUREMENT OR
DESIRE TO GET AN ELECTRIC
VEHICLE.
THERE ARE NOT A LOT
OF MANUFACTURERS OF SMALLER
ELECTRIC PLOWS AND SWEEPERS.
THERE ARE SOME THE LAST I HEARD
AND WE JUST MET ON THIS
YESTERDAY WITH PUBLIC WORKS IS
THE LEAD TIME IS NOT
SIGNIFICANTLY DIFFERENT THAT
EVEN THE DIESEL POWERED OR
GASOLINE POWERED ONES ARE
ALMOST A YEAR OUT ON SOME
OF THAT EQUIPMENT BECAUSE
EVERYTHING IS SUFFERING FROM
THE SAME SUPPLY CHAIN ISSUES.
IT ALMOST IS A MATTER WITH
PROPULSION IS SO WHILE THERE
MAY BE LESS VENDORS THAT
PRODUCE THIS, THEIR LEAD TIME
IS FAIRLY SIMILAR.
MIGHT BE A COUPLE OF MONTHS
DIFFERENT BUT IT&apos;S NOT A YEAR
AND DIFFERENCE.
SO I THINK THE LEAD TIME IS
KIND OF INCONSEQUENTIAL.
THERE IS A COST DIFFERENTIAL.
I FORGET THE EXACT NUMBERS SO
DON&apos;T QUOTE ME ON THIS BUT I
THINK A GASOLINE POWERED
VEHICLE WOULD HAVE BEEN, YOU
KNOW, LIKE IN THE LOW HUNDREDS
AND THIS WOULD BE MAYBE A
LITTLE BIT MORE CLOSE TO DOUBLE
THAT AND BUT MAYBE THE
PERFORMANCE IS LONGER AND MAYBE
WE SAVE MONEY ON GAS AND OTHER
THINGS SO MAYBE THERE IS A
RETURN ON INVESTMENT ON IT BUT
IT ALSO ALIGNS WITH THE CITY&apos;S
CARBON NEUTRALITY GOALS.
SO SO I THINK PART OF IT IS
ALSO JUST THE BUDGETING PIECE
RIGHT?
IT&apos;S BOTH ORDERING IN THE LEAD
TIME AND THEN ALSO TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT HOW WE PROCURE IT
WITH THE FUNDING THAT WE HAVE
AND THEN AS MOLLY KIND
OF ALLUDED TO OR MAYBE WAS
BRETT WE THEN ALSO HAVE TO WE
HAVE PROGRAM THE YEAR OVER YEAR
MAINTENANCE LIKE WE AMORTIZE
THE PIECE OF EQUIPMENT ANY TIME
WE BUY ANYTHING AT THE CITY
IT&apos;S KIND OF AMORTIZED OVER ITS
LIFECYCLE.
SO WHETHER IT&apos;S A COMPUTER THAT
I&apos;M DIALING IN ON OR ANYTHING
WE PROJECT THAT WITH THAT
LIFECYCLE IS AND THEN HAVE TO
FACTOR INTO THE BUDGET THE
REPLACEMENT COST OF THAT YEAR
OVER YEAR.
SO IT&apos;S NOT JUST THE INITIAL
PURCHASE, IT&apos;S ALSO THE ONGOING
MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT
OF THAT EQUIPMENT INTO THE
FUTURE THINGS.
SO IT SOUNDS LIKE SO THERE&apos;S A
COST CONCERN BUT IT SOUNDS LIKE
IN TERMS OF THE WEIGHT THERE&apos;S
NOT A SUBSTANTIAL DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE OPTIONS.
SO I&apos;M OK WITH SORT OF LEAVING
THIS RESOLUTION IN NEUTRAL ON
PROPULSION.
&gt;&gt; RAYMOND PUT IT JULIE YEAH.
I WAS JUST GOING TO SAY I LIKE
THE NEUTRALITY OF THE PROPOSAL
AND ALL OF THOSE ISSUES I SORT
OF FEEL LIKE WE SHOULDN&apos;T BE
MICROMANAGING THIS.
THERE ARE OTHER PEOPLE TO DO
THAT.
WE JUST GUIDE THE POLICY.
YEAH, AGREED.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL, I&apos;M NOT SEEING OTHER
HANDS SO CAN I GET A MOTION TO
RECOMMEND OR A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE BICYCLE FACILITY
MAINTENANCE RESOLUTION AS
INCLUDED IN THE PACKET?
JULIE, CAN I GET A SECOND?
MEGAN GREAT.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE
MOTION PLEASE RAISE YOUR HAND
OR SAY YES.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED.
ANY ABSTENTIONS?
ALL RIGHT.
THE MOTION PASSES AND WE WILL
REFER THIS UP TO CITY COUNCIL,
TELL THEM TO FIGURE IT OUT AND
BUY US SOME CUTE LITTLE
MAINTENANCE VEHICLES.
THANKS EVERYONE.
SO NEXT WE ARE REVISITING THE S
75TH AND GREENVIEW PROJECT.
SO YOU MAY RECALL THAT LAST
MONTH WE REVIEWED A COUPLE
OF DIFFERENT DESIGN OPTIONS FOR
FOR THIS PROJECT.
ONE OF THEM INVOLVED NO CHANGE
IN PARKING WITH PAINTED BIKE
LANES.
THAT WAS THE RECOMMENDED
DESIGN.
THE OTHER ONE INVOLVED REMOVING
PARKING ON ONE SIDE WITH
DELINEATOR AND THEN PARKING ON
THE INSIDE OF THE BIKE LANE
CLOSE TO THE CURB AND THAT WAS
ULTIMATELY THE ONE THAT WE
RECOMMENDED ALTHOUGH I THINK WE
HAD SOME RESERVATIONS ABOUT
BOTH ALL THE DESIGNS THAT WE
SAW.
PETE, I DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU WANT
TO TALK A BIT MORE ABOUT THE
WHAT WE&apos;RE WHY WE&apos;RE BRINGING
IT BACK, HOW WE WANT ADDRESS
IT.
&gt;&gt; YES.
SO I HAVE TWO MAIN REASONS WHY
I WANTED TO BRING IT BACK.
ONE IS THAT SINCE I&apos;VE SPOKEN
TO SEVERAL NEIGHBORS WHO LIVE
NEAR THIS AREA, SOME OF THEM
THOUGHT THAT REMOVING PARKING
WAS A GOOD IDEA.
SOME THOUGHT WASN&apos;T A GOOD IDEA
BUT EVERYBODY SEEMED TO AGREE
THE PROBLEM IS THAT TRAFFIC IS
TOO FAST ON SEVEN AND IS
DANGEROUS.
&gt;&gt; WE NEED TO GET IT TO SLOW
DOWN.
SO WHAT WE APPROVED IN OUR LAST
MEETING MAY HAVE BEEN THE BEST
ALTERNATIVE THAT WAS PRESENTED
.
IT DOES NOT APPEAR TO ME TO BE
THE BEST POSSIBLE ALTERNATIVE,
ESPECIALLY NOT THE BEST THING
FOR SLOWING INCOMING TRAFFIC ON
THE STRETCH SEVEN.
I ALSO GATHER THAT
THAT TRAFFIC
CALMING IS NOT THE TYPICAL PART
OF A PROJECT LIKE THIS AND I
THINK IN THIS CASE IT SHOULD BE
THE OTHER REASON THAT I&apos;M
BRINGING IT BACK IS THAT ON
TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA OBVIOUSLY WE
JUST APPROVED A MOTION ASKING
FOR ACTION SMALLER PLOW
EQUIPMENT THAT CAN MANAGE
NARROWER BIKE LANES.
WHAT THAT WOULD DO IS IT WOULD
ENABLE DIFFERENT DESIGNS THAN
THE ONES THAT WERE PROPOSED TO
US IN THE LAST MEETING WOULD
ENABLE A PROTECTED BIKE, NOT A
SINGLE WICK AND THAT INCLUDES
VERTICAL DELINEATOR FOR
EXAMPLE.
THAT&apos;S ONE EXAMPLE OF WHAT IT
WOULD MEAN.
SO THAT OPTION IS NOT POSSIBLE
TODAY UNTIL WE GET THAT
EQUIPMENT.
BUT IF WE ARE GOING TO MAKE
SOME PROGRESS ON THAT THEN I
THINK WE NEED TO LET STAFF COME
UP WITH IDEAS OR PROPOSALS THAT
COULD USE IT.
LAST THING THAT I WANT TO ADD
ABOUT THIS STREET SO TAKE
ANOTHER LOOK AT IT IS THAT THE
THE SPEED ON THIS ROAD IS
BROUGHT ON BY AN ENGINEERING
PROBLEM, NAMELY THAT THE STREET
IS TOO WIDE FOR HOW IT&apos;S USED
TODAY AND THAT PROBLEM NEEDS TO
BE FIXED BY ENGINEERING.
THERE ARE TWO SPEED LIMIT SIGNS
ON SEVEN APPROACHING SIWA
CHURCH FROM THE NORTH BUT THERE
IS NO SPEED LIMIT SIGN SAY
THIRTY FIVE MILES PER HOUR BUT
THERE&apos;S NOTHING AT ALL SOUTH
OF SOME CHURCH THAT TELLS
DRIVERS EXPLICITLY OR
IMPLICITLY THAT THEY NEED TO
SLOW DOWN BECAUSE THEY HAVE
TRANSITIONED INTO A RESIDENTIAL
AREA SO THERE&apos;S NO SPEED LIMIT
SIGNS, THERE&apos;S NO NARROWING
OF THE STREET.
THERE&apos;S NO SIGN THAT ANNOUNCES
WELCOME TO LANDSDOWN
NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO IT&apos;S NO SURPRISE THAT PEOPLE
WILL DRIVE TOO FAST AND I THINK
THIS IS THE TIME TO FIX THAT
USING THIS IT&apos;S TIME TO
ENGINEER EFFECTS WITH THE
TRAFFIC CALMING ELEMENTS THAT
WE HAVE IN OUR TRAFFIC CALMING
GUIDEBOOK.
SO THAT IS WHY I WOULD LIKE TO
RESCIND OUR SUPPORT BOARD OR
THAT PROPOSAL AND BASICALLY ASK
FOR SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
THANK YOU ERIKA.
YEAH AND THANKS.
I AM SORRY TO TO NOT BE HERE
LAST MONTH BUT I DID WATCH THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
DISCUSSION AND ACTUALLY HAD THE
BENEFIT OF BEING ABLE TO HEAR
YOUR DISCUSSION AND THEN GET
YOU REACHED OUT TO BY THE
FOURTH WARD REPRESENTATIVES
COUNCIL MEMBER IHR AND GO OUT
AND KIND OF VISIT THE THE
STREET IN PERSON AND THEN HAVE
I ACTUALLY PETE AND I WERE OUT
THERE I&apos;VE MET WITH INCOMING
COUNCIL MEMBER DARMA AS WELL
AND AND THEN COUNCIL MEMBER IA
AND I HAVE ALSO MET WITH MR.
HESSTON MR HUTCHINSON ON THIS
ISSUE AND SO I&apos;VE HAD A LITTLE
BIT MORE TIME TO TO REFLECT IN
AND GET A LITTLE MORE FEEDBACK
ABOUT WHY WHY SOME OF THE
ELEMENTS THAT WERE PRESENTED TO
US OR TRENDSPOTTING
REPRESENTATIVE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION WERE PRESENTED TO
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND
I&apos;D LIKE TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT I
THINK THAT TRANSPORTATION STAFF
IS IN A LITTLE BIT OF A STICKY
POSITION BASED ON HOW WE&apos;VE
HANDLED THESE THIS TYPE
OF DESIGN WORK IN THE PAST BUT
ESSENTIALLY, YOU KNOW, AS PETE
MENTIONED, I THINK WHAT&apos;S
REALLY CLEAR ABOUT THIS PORTION
OF 7TH STREET IS THAT WE DO
HAVE A MUCH WIDER STREET HERE.
IT&apos;S SUPPOSED TO BE WE&apos;RE
SUPPOSED TO BE ENTERING INTO A
NEIGHBORHOOD WE SHOULD BE
THINKING ABOUT.
THIS IS KIND OF A SLOWER
STREETS OPPORTUNITY OVER
GREENWAY BIKE BOULEVARD SORT
OF OPPORTUNITY BUT BECAUSE
OF THE WIDTH OF THE STREET, I
THINK SOME OF THE WE APPROACHED
HIM A LITTLE MORE LIKE WE HOW
WE MADE OUR ARTERIAL AND I
THINK IT FELT A LITTLE CLUNKY
FOR EVERYBODY INVOLVED BECAUSE
THAT&apos;S NOT REALLY HOW THIS
STREET IS SUPPOSED TO FUNCTION.
AND SO I THINK THE DESIGN
OF THIS IN SOME WAYS IS
ENCOURAGING BEHAVIOR IN THE
FUTURE ISN&apos;T REALLY CONSISTENT
WITH HOW WE WANT TO SEE THE
STREET BEING USED.
SOME OF THE FEEDBACK THAT WE&apos;VE
THAT COUNCIL MEMBER AND I HAVE
RECEIVED THROUGH OUR
DISCUSSIONS IS THAT THE TRAFFIC
THAT SPEED MANAGEMENT WASN&apos;T
REALLY INTEGRATED WITH THE ALL
AGES AND ABILITY BIKE ROUTE
DESIGNED BECAUSE TRAFFIC COMING
IS VIEWED AS A SEPARATE PROCESS
FROM SORT OF THE BIKE DESIGN
ELEMENT.
AND SO I THINK WE&apos;VE GOT A
LITTLE BIT OF CHALLENGES HERE
BECAUSE I THINK EVERYBODY
AGREES THAT SPEED IS REALLY THE
PRIMARY OR AT LEAST ONE OF THE
PRIMARY ISSUES IN THIS IN THIS
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT NEEDS TO BE
ADDRESSED AND THAT&apos;S NOT
NECESSARILY THE GUIDING FOCUS
AS WE MOVE THROUGH THIS.
SO WE HAVE THE SUBCOMMITTEE
THAT&apos;S GETTING SET UP THAT
HASN&apos;T STARTED TO MEET YET
AROUND RECONSIDERING OUR
TRAFFIC COMING PROCESS AND
THINKING THAT AND SO WE&apos;RE IN A
LITTLE BIT OF A DIFFICULT TIME
PERIOD RIGHT NOW.
BUT I PERSONALLY BELIEVE THAT
WE MIGHT WANT TO TAKE A MORE
OF AN INTEGRATED APPROACH TO
THIS DESIGN AND MELD TOGETHER
SPEED MANAGEMENT AND AND ALL
AGES ABILITIES ROUTE AND SEE
WHAT SORT OF DESIGN ELEMENTS
MIGHT COME FORWARD.
FOR EXAMPLE, WHAT WOULD HAPPEN
IF WE PUT MEDIANS IN THE MIDDLE
OR UTILIZED MINI ROUNDABOUTS AT
THE INTERSECTION SPEED CUSHIONS
OR POINTS OR SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT I&apos;VE SEEN THAT MIGHT BE
ELEMENTS THAT MIGHT BE USED
MORE GREENWAY APPROACH THOSE
ARE JUST SOME OF THE THINGS
HAVE BEEN DISCUSSED BUT I AM
LOOKING FOR THE ADVICE
OF TRANSPORTATION
PROFESSIONALS.
THANK YOU RAYMOND NICK, I DON&apos;T
KNOW IF YOU HAVE ANY RESPONSE
TO SOME OF THESE QUESTIONS OR
MAYBE IT MIGHT BE HELPFUL TO
HAVE A LITTLE BIT OF CONTEXT AS
TO WHY THE PLAN CAME FORWARD
THE WAY THAT IT DID AND HELPING
US SORT OF FIGURE OUT HOW WE
WANT TO MOVE AS A COMMISSION ON
THIS PROJECT.
YEAH, NICK, I&apos;LL TAKE FIRST
STAB AT IT AND THEN YOU CAN
FILL IN ANY BLANKS I MAY HAVE
MISSED SO YOU KNOW, AGAIN, THE
DRIVING FORCE BEHIND THIS IS A
LOT OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY WORK
AND I THINK STORMWATER AND
OTHER THINGS AND AS IS OFTEN
THE CASE, ANY TIME THERE&apos;S A
UTILITY PROJECT THAT ESPECIALLY
IS GOING TO TEAR UP THE ROAD,
WE LOOK FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO
INCORPORATE DIFFERENT ELEMENTS,
ESPECIALLY BICYCLE PEDESTRIAN
ELEMENTS PURSUANT TO THE THE
VISION ZERO TRANSPORTATION PLAN
.
WHAT&apos;S INTERESTING ABOUT THIS
SECTION OF SEVEN WHICH I THINK
IS PLAYING OUT IN THIS
DISCUSSION AND EVEN STASS
MENTALITY IS THIS IS A
NEIGHBORHOOD STREET AS PETE HAS
MENTIONED AND OTHERS.
BUT ONCE UPON A TIME IT WAS NOT
ENVISIONED TO BE SUCH RIGHT.
IT WAS ACTUALLY ENVISIONED 7TH
WAS WAS PLANNED TO GO FURTHER
SOUTH AND CONNECTING AND
OBVIOUSLY AS I UNDERSTAND AND
THAT DIDN&apos;T HAPPEN AND THAT&apos;S
FINE.
BUT THAT&apos;S WHY THIS SECTION
OF A NEIGHBORHOOD LOCAL STREET
IS MUCH WIDER THAN WHAT YOU
WOULD TYPICALLY FIND IN MOST
OF OUR NEIGHBORHOOD STREETS ARE
THIRTY FEET ACROSS.
I THINK THIS ONE IS CLOSE TO 50
OR 60 FEET ACROSS BECAUSE IT
WAS PLANNED TO AN ARTERIAL OR
MAYBE A COLLECTOR.
SO PETE&apos;S RIGHT TO IDENTIFY
THAT THIS IS KIND OF A
CONTRIBUTING FACTOR TO THIS
SORT OF PERCEPTION ABOUT HOW
THE ROAD IS USED OR HOW IT
SHOULD BE USED BECAUSE IT IS AN
EXTENSION OF 7TH STREET AS IT&apos;S
CURRENTLY BUILT.
&gt;&gt; SO WHEN STAFF KIND OF LOOKED
AT THE MENU OF OPTIONS OF HOW
WE COULD INCORPORATE ALL AGES
AND ABILITIES BIKE FACILITY
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND EVEN
QUITE FRANKLY A LOT OF THE
DOCUMENTS WHETHER IT&apos;S NAGATO
AND OTHERS YOU KNOW, TYPICALLY
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT NEIGHBORHOOD
STREETS OR LOCAL STREETS YOU
TEND NOT TO DO A HIGHER ORDER
FACILITY.
MOST OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS DON&apos;T
HAVE SIGNED OR PAINTED BIKE
LANES OR BIKE ROUTES OR ANY
OF THAT BECAUSE THEY&apos;RE LOW
VOLUME STREETS AND YOU KNOW,
IT&apos;S IT&apos;S FAIRLY COMFORTABLE TO
RIDE ON THOSE NEIGHBORHOOD
STREETS EVEN WITHOUT A
DEDICATED FACILITY.
BUT SINCE WE HAD SO MUCH SPACE
OUT HERE ON 7TH, WE KNEW THERE
WAS AN OPPORTUNITY A TO TRY TO,
YOU KNOW, NARROW THE TRAVEL
LANES AND WE HAD ROOM TO PUT IN
A BIKE FACILITY.
NOW I KNOW THE COMPROMISE
SOLUTION THAT STAFF PROPOSED
WHICH I UNDERSTAND WHY IT
WASN&apos;T SUPPORTED BUT BASED ON
THE FEEDBACK WE WERE GETTING
FROM THE NEIGHBORHOOD, THERE
WAS SOME CONCERN ABOUT
ELIMINATION OF THE PARKING AND
SO PARKING DOES HAVE A SORT
OF TRAFFIC CALMING ELEMENT.
BUT I APPRECIATE WHAT
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSIONER
SAID THE LAST MONTH ABOUT
WHETHER ON STREET PARKING IS
NEEDED OUT HERE UTILIZE TO THE
FULL EXTENT.
SO THAT&apos;S WHY WE PROPOSED TO
KEEP THE PARKING BASED ON WHAT
WE WERE HEARING FROM THE
NEIGHBORHOOD AND PUT IN JUST A
TRADITIONAL SINGLE STRIPE BIKE
LANE.
NOW MANY PEOPLE WILL SAY LOOK
AT THAT AND SAY WELL THAT&apos;S NOT
REALLY AN ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES BIKE FACILITY AND
THAT IS TRUE EXCEPT THAT ON A
NEIGHBORHOOD STREET IT IT IS
KIND OF ACCEPTABLE BECAUSE
AGAIN LOWER VOLUMES, LOWER
SPEEDS WE WOULD HAVE A SORT
OF LANE NARROWING EFFECT WITH
THAT APPROACH THAT THE HOPE
WOULD BE THAT THE SPEEDS WOULD
COME DOWN AGAIN, NO PRIDE OF OF
DECISION THERE
.
THAT&apos;S NOT THE WAY TO GO.
THAT&apos;S FINE.
WE CAN LOOK AT OTHER
ALTERNATIVES AND SO WHEN THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
DISCUSSED THIS LAST MONTH,
THERE WAS THIS ACKNOWLEDGMENT
THAT A HIGHER ORDER BIKE
FACILITY WOULD BE PREFERABLE
WHICH CAN BE ACCOMMODATED.
WE CAN PUT IN A PROTECTED
WHETHER IT BE BUFFERED WITH NO
VERTICAL DONATORS OR PROTECTED
WITH VERTICAL DELINEATOR IN THE
SAME SPACE BUT IN TO
ACCOMMODATE THAT WE WOULD HAVE
HAD TO REMOVE PARKING ON ONE
SIDE OF THE ROOF WHICH AGAIN IT
CAN BE ACCOMMODATED THAT THAT&apos;S
PERFECTLY ACCEPTABLE APPROACH.
SO YEAH, I THINK THAT&apos;S WHERE
WE LANDED WHERE WE LANDED.
I APPRECIATE IF THERE ARE SOME
FOLLEY IN THAT APPROACH AND HOW
WE GOT TO WHERE WE WERE BUT IT
WASN&apos;T ARBITRARY.
WE KIND OF TRIED TO FOLLOW THE
CUES THAT WE WERE GETTING FROM
THE COMMUNITY AND OTHERS AND
SOMETIMES WE TRY TO MAKE
EVERYBODY HAPPY AND MAKE NO ONE
HAPPY IN THE PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; SO I THINK THAT&apos;S WHERE WE
LANDED.
I THINK IN TERMS OF YOUR
ACTIONS NIGHT TO RESCIND YOUR
VOTE I I DON&apos;T KNOW IF NICK OR
I HAVE AN IMMEDIATE THOUGHT
ABOUT HOW THAT PLAYS OUT
BECAUSE WE HAVE ALREADY TEED
THIS UP FOR COUNCIL&apos;S
CONSIDERATION BECAUSE REMOVAL
OF PARKING IS A COUNCIL
APPROVED ACTION.
SO I SUSPECT THAT THAT WOULD
BECOME NULL AND VOID.
BUT THEN WE MIGHT ALSO NEED
SOME FURTHER DIRECTION ABOUT
WHAT THE NEXT STEPS ARE.
I&apos;M HEARING FROM PETE AND ERIKA
ABOUT MAYBE A HIGHER PREFERENCE
FOR SPEED MANAGEMENT BUT I
DON&apos;T KNOW IF THAT MEANS NO
PROTECTED BIKE FACILITY SO THAT
THAT&apos;S WHERE I&apos;M KIND
OF STRUGGLING.
I&apos;M HEARING LIKE THESE
DIFFERENT THINGS THAT SHOULD BE
INCORPORATED WHICH AGAIN THE
GOOD NEWS IS OUT HERE WE HAVE
ROOM TO INCORPORATE IT.
WE CAN&apos;T MAYBE DO ALL BUT WE
CAN INCORPORATE A LOT OF THAT
BUT WE MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO DO
EVERYTHING RIGHT.
SO IF WE WANT YOU KNOW, TRAFFIC
CALMING ELEMENTS OR THINGS
OF THAT NATURE, IF THAT&apos;S THE
DIRECTION WE GET FROM THIS BODY
AND OR COUNCIL, WE WOULD NEED
TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THE TRADEOFF
IS IN RELATIONSHIP TO PROTECTED
SEPARATED BIKE FACILITY AND OR
THE PARKING.
SO ALL OF THOSE THINGS ARE IN
PLAY AND THAT&apos;S THE STUFF WE&apos;RE
TRYING TO JUGGLE IN TERMS
OF WHAT WHERE THERE&apos;S THE MOST
SUPPORT FOR THOSE CONCEPTS.
OK, NICK, I NEED A LIFELINE
BAIAME BEFORE I SAY TOO MUCH
MAYBE TOO LATE.
RUMAN I GUESS I WOULD JUST ADD
ARRAIGNMENT&apos;S
COVERED EVERYTHING FROM THE
TRANSPORTATION SIDE OF THINGS.
I DON&apos;T NEED ANYTHING TO THAT
WHAT I WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT I
THINK WHAT I WANT TO MENTION IS
THAT IF WE IF WHAT THE DESIRE
IS IS TO LOOK AT A LOT OF THESE
OTHER THINGS THAT COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGG&apos;S RECOMMENDED A
MEDIAN ROUNDABOUT&apos;S THINGS LIKE
THAT, THEN REALLY WHAT THE
RECOMMENDATION IS GOING TO NEED
TO BE IS TO DELAY THE PROJECT
ANOTHER YEAR AND THAT&apos;S JUST
PRACTICAL BECAUSE WE WOULD NOT
HAVE TIME TO GO BACK AND DO
THAT SOME PRETTY ROBUST PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT PRETTY SOME SOME
PRETTY MAJOR CHANGES AND THAT
AND WE WOULD NOT DO THOSE KIND
OF CHANGES WITHOUT A LOT
OF DISCUSSION WITH PUBLIC
PROBABLY MORE THAN ONE MEETING
I WOULD IMAGINE AND THEN READ
AND THEN ONCE SETTLING ON AN
OPTION REDESIGNING IF WHAT WE
WERE TALKING ABOUT IS HOW WE
WANT TO STRIKE THE FACILITIES,
DO WE WANT TO PUT IN BUFFORD
SEPARATED STANDARD BIKE LANES
MOST THAT IS PAVEMENT MARKINGS
AND RELATIVELY EASILY EASILY
CHANGED VERTICAL LITIGATOR&apos;S
AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
THAT DOESN&apos;T GIVE ME MUCH
HEARTBURN IN TERMS OF SCHEDULE
DECIDING ON THOSE THINGS WE
COULD DO WE COULD STILL WE CAN
MAKE THOSE CHANGES ANY TIME AND
IT&apos;S NOT REALLY VERY IMPACTFUL
TO THE PLANS OF THE BIDDING
PROCESS AND EVERYTHING LIKE
THAT.
BUT IF WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT MAJOR,
MAJOR CHANGES WHICH SOME
OF WHAT I&apos;VE HEARD TONIGHT I
WOULD CONSIDER VERY MAJOR
CHANGES AND WOULD REALLY CHANGE
THOUGH OUR WHOLE DESIGN THAT&apos;S
NOT GOING TO BE FEASIBLE UNDER
THE CURRENT TIMELINE.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE
EVERYBODY UNDERSTANDS THE
THANKS.
I&apos;M CURIOUS WHY WHY WE WOULD
NEED TO DO A LOT OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT FOR SOME OF THESE
CHANGES IF IT&apos;S ALL STUFF
THAT&apos;S ALREADY IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AS LIKE
WHICH WE DID A TON OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT ON THESE THE KINDS
OF DEVICES AND APPROACHES THAT
WE CAN USE TO SLOW SPEEDS MAKE
THINGS SAFER FOR BIKES AND
PEDESTRIANS.
I&apos;M NOT SURE BECAUSE THERE&apos;S
ALREADY BEEN A LOT OF PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT THAT THIS PROJECT IS
HAPPENING AND SO I&apos;M CURIOUS
ABOUT THAT.
&gt;&gt; I GUESS I WOULD JUST SAY
THAT THAT&apos;S AN INTERESTING
PHILOSOPHICAL SHIFT IF WE WERE
GOING TO MAKE SUCH MAJOR
CHANGES WITHOUT TALKING TO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD ABOUT IT BECAUSE
THAT&apos;S ALWAYS THE WAY WE&apos;VE
DONE IT.
I MEAN THERE&apos;S BEEN
OPPORTUNITIES FOR PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT ON THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN CERTAINLY.
BUT THE THE INDIVIDUALS THAT
ARE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD WEREN&apos;T
NECESSARILY ENGAGING IN THAT
AND IT&apos;S BEEN OUR PRACTICE TO
NOT MAKE SUCH MAJOR CHANGES
WITHOUT HAVING A DISCUSSION
WITH THE PUBLIC IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD INVOLVED.
AND LIKE I SAID, THAT&apos;S THAT
THAT THAT&apos;S THE WAY WE&apos;VE DONE
THINGS IT WOULD I WOULD BE VERY
HESITANT NOT TO I WOULD SAY
THAT THOUGH JUST OUT
OF CURIOSITY, WHAT WOULD WHAT
WOULD SUCH A PHILOSOPHICAL
SHIFT REQUIRE IS THAT A COUNCIL
ACTION?
&gt;&gt; WHAT DOES THAT LOOK LIKE?
I DON&apos;T I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW TO
ANSWER THAT AND I THINK THAT&apos;S
A I THINK THAT&apos;S A CONVERSATION
AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS WITH THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR&apos;S OFFICE
BECAUSE WE&apos;VE WE FOCUSED FOR
YEARS ON TRYING TO IMPROVE
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT AND TALKING
TO THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
NOT SURPRISING PEOPLE WHEN WE
PUT THINGS IN NOT PUTTING
THINGS ON WITHOUT GIVING PEOPLE
AN OPPORTUNITY TO GIVE US
FEEDBACK ON IT.
SO I WOULD BE LIKE I SAID, I
WOULD BE VERY HESITANT TO DO
SOMETHING LIKE THAT GOING OFF
OUR OUR NORMAL SCRIPT SCRIPT
SCRIPTS NOT THE RIGHT WORD BUT
OUR NORMAL PHILOSOPHY IN TERMS
OF ENGAGING THE PUBLIC.
SO ALL RIGHT.
I SEE JULIANNE AND ERICA.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO I REMEMBER LAST MONTH I WAS
A LITTLE FRUSTRATED THAT WE
DIDN&apos;T HAVE ANY DATA ABOUT
SPEEDS ON THAT ROAD OR HOW THE
RESIDENTS FELT ABOUT SPEED ON
THAT ROAD.
DO WE HAVE THAT DATA NOW
BECAUSE I DON&apos;T MIND DELAYING
IT IF IT MEANS GETTING BETTER
DATA TO YOU KNOW, MAKE BETTER
DATA DRIVEN DESIGNS.
I SORT OF HATE TO GO FROM A
CHEAPER PLAN TO A MUCH MORE
EXPENSIVE PLAN WITHOUT HAVING
SOME DATA TO HELP MOTIVATE IT.
&gt;&gt; WE DON&apos;T HAVE ANY NEW DATA
SINCE LAST TIME.
BUT AS WAS MENTIONED, IF THERE
IS A DELAY TO THE PROJECT THAT
AFFORDS THE TIME TO COLLECT
THAT DATA.
YEAH, ERIKA.
&gt;&gt; SO OBVIOUSLY I AM A COUNCIL
MEMBER.
&gt;&gt; I HAVE A TENDENCY TO BE A
LITTLE HESITANT ABOUT DELAYING
PROJECTS THAT ARE NOT
SUGGESTING DELAYING PROJECTS
THAT ARE NOT IN MY WARD AS WELL
.
BUT I HAVE FROM COUNCIL MEMBER
IA THAT AT LEAST THAT HER
PERSPECTIVE IS THAT FROM THE
NEIGHBORS ONE OF THE NEIGHBORS
PRIMARY CONCERNS IS SPEED AND I
GUESS I&apos;M CURIOUS THAT THAT HAS
BEEN REFLECTED IN THE THE
FEEDBACK THAT YOU&apos;VE GOTTEN TO
DATE IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MEETINGS IF THAT&apos;S SOMETHING
THAT IS A THEME THAT HAS COME
UP WITHIN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MEETINGS ALREADY CONCERNS
AROUND SPEED AND SHE HAS VOICED
THAT IF IF WHAT&apos;S NEEDED TO TO
DO THIS PROJECT SORT
OF PROPERLY IS TO IT NEEDS A
LITTLE MORE TIME THAT THAT SHE
AT LEAST IS OK WITH THAT.
I KNOW THAT FROM SORT OF THE
START OF THIS THAT THE GUIDING
PROJECT HERE IS A WATER MAIN
PROJECT.
AND SO I GUESS PART OF THIS IS
ALSO IS HOW HOW ESSENTIAL IS
THAT PROJECT TO MOVE FORWARD
THIS COMING YEAR VERSUS, YOU
KNOW, GETTING TO EIGHTY YEAR?
OBVIOUSLY THAT THAT WAS SORT
OF THE GUIDING REASON YOU WERE
COMING TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD TO
BEGIN WITH.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, HONESTLY THIS
PROJECT&apos;S BEEN ON THE BOOKS FOR
A WHILE AND AT THIS POINT I
DON&apos;T REMEMBER IF THE ROAD OR
THE WATER MAIN WAS THE DRIVING
FORCE BEHIND IT BUT I I I WOULD
HAVE TO CHECK ON THAT.
I SUSPECT THAT THAT DELAYING
THE WATER MAIN PROJECT FOR
ANOTHER YEAR IS NOT GOING TO
MAKE THAT MUCH OF A DIFFERENCE.
I DON&apos;T THINK THAT THERE&apos;S A
EXTREMELY URGENT NEED THERE.
IT&apos;S KIND TENDS TO BE THE KIND
OF THINGS WELL IF THIS IS
HAPPENING WE SHOULD DO THIS AS
WELL AND THAT&apos;S WHY THE
STORMWATER ASPECT OF IT THEN
THERE ARE TWO I MEAN I WOULD I
WOULD HAVE TO DISCUSS THAT WITH
SEVERAL PEOPLE INTERNALLY IF
THE PROJECT IS DELAYED THERE.
WELL THERE THERE&apos;S WE&apos;RE MOVING
MONEY IN THE WATER FUND THE
STORMWATER THE STREET FUND.
I&apos;VE GOT TO MAKE SURE THAT ALL
OF THAT STOCK THAT&apos;S GOING TO
BE DOABLE.
I THINK IT WILL BE.
&gt;&gt; BUT YOU KNOW, IT&apos;S THERE&apos;S A
LOT OF MOVING PARTS THERE.
&gt;&gt; SO I HAVE A QUICK QUESTION.
DO YOU EVER DO A BIG ROAD
RECONSTRUCTION WITHOUT A
UTILITY PROJECT UNDERNEATH?
WELL, THIS IS NOT A THIS IS NOT
A RECONSTRUCTION BUT FIRST
OF ALL IS THE FIRST THING THAT
I WOULD SAY
IF WE&apos;RE
RECONSTRUCTING A ROAD THEN WE
THEN YEAH, WE LINE UP THE
UTILITIES WITH IT.
NOW IF THERE&apos;S NO UTILITY NEEDS
OUT THERE THEN THAT&apos;S GREAT.
BUT USUALLY THERE&apos;S SOMETHING
SO IF WE&apos;RE DOING A MAJOR
RECONSTRUCTION PROJECT THEN
YEAH, THAT USUALLY INCLUDES
SOME UTILITY WORK IF THERE&apos;S A
NEED FOR IT.
BUT THIS WAS ALWAYS ENVISIONED
AS A RESURFACING PROJECT NOT AS
A COMPLETE RECONSTRUCTION.
&gt;&gt; OK, SO I SEE BRET AND THEN
ERICA BUT I MIGHT BE COMING IN
WITH SOMETHING BETWEEN THE TWO
OF YOU SO GO ARE THERE MY OLDER
OPTIONS IN TRAFFIC CALMING TOOL
BOX THAT WOULDN&apos;T REQUIRE SUCH
A DRASTIC REDESIGN AND
ENGAGEMENT THINGS JUST LIKE
RAISED CROSSWALKS, YOU KNOW,
THINGS THAT ARE SIMILAR IN
SCOPE THAT COULD HAVE A
POSITIVE EFFECT ON SPEEDS BUT
MAYBE WOULDN&apos;T TRIGGER A YEAR
DELAY AND ALL KINDS OF OTHER
THINGS THAT COME FROM A FULL
REDESIGN?
WELL, I THINK SOME OF THOSE
ELEMENTS ARE ENVISIONED TO BE
INCORPORATED INTO THE PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
SO THERE ARE SOME BUMP OUTS
KNOW A BIKE LANE WITH
DELINEATOR AND THEORY DOES HAVE
THAT LANE NARROWING EFFECT AND
SHOULD HAVE A POSITIVE
CONTRIBUTION ON SPEEDS.
IF WE GO WITH A DIFFERENT
OPTION THEN THAT&apos;S FINE.
BUT THE ONLY THE HESITATION AND
RESISTANCE YOU HEAR FROM STAFF
ABOUT TRYING TO INCORPORATE
CERTAIN TRAFFIC CALMING
ELEMENTS INTO A CAPITAL PROJECT
IS YOU KNOW, WE HAVE AN
ESTABLISHED PROGRAM FOR TRAFFIC
CALMING AND THAT PROGRAM IS
POPULAR.
IT&apos;S ACTUALLY MORE POPULAR THAN
WE CAN KEEP UP WITH AT THE TIME
WE&apos;VE DONE A TRAFFIC CALMING
PROJECT RIGHT AROUND THE CORNER
FROM HERE ON THE SITE, A CHURCH
SERVICE DRIVE AND THEN WE HAVE
ANOTHER ONE IN Q RIGHT AROUND
THE CORNER ON MACHON SO THAT
OUR OUR EXPERIENCE WITH TRAFFIC
CALMING IN THE PAST IS WE
REALLY TRY TO WORK ITERATIVELY
ON WHICH DEVICES THE
NEIGHBORHOOD SUPPORTS IN TERMS
OF VERTICAL PEOPLE WANT TO
DRIVE OVER THINGS LIKE SPEED
HUMPS OR DO THEY WANT TO DRIVE
AROUND THINGS WHAT WE CALL
HORIZONTAL DEVICES AND A LOT
OF THAT IS JUST VERY ITERATIVE.
WE HAVE TO GO THROUGH SEVERAL
IT&apos;S ALMOST LIKE WE RUN IT LIKE
A CHARRETTE SO IT&apos;S VERY LABOR
INTENSIVE AND SO FOR US TO KIND
OF CIRCUMVENT THAT PROCESS AND
PUT IT INTO A CAPITAL PROJECT,
IT IT MAKES US NERVOUS BECAUSE
IT IT KIND OF DOESN&apos;T HONOR OR
RESPECT THE EXISTING TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAM AND ALSO FOR
THE 17
PROJECT SO AND I KNOW
I&apos;VE HEARD FROM THIS COMMISSION
AND OTHERS THAT WE SHOULD LOOK
AT INCORPORATING TRAFFIC COMING
PROJECTS AS PART OF CAPITAL
PROJECTS.
I GET THAT I PHILOSOPHICALLY I
DON&apos;T EVEN NECESSARILY DISAGREE
BUT I WILL TELL YOU TRAFFIC
COMING IS NOT ALWAYS POPULAR
WITH EVERYONE AND SO THAT&apos;S WHY
WE VET THESE THINGS PUBLICLY.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S WHY IT&apos;S A VERY
INTENSIVE PROCESS BECAUSE SOME
PEOPLE DO NOT WANT TO DRIVE
OVER RACE CROSSWALKS.
SO WE REALLY HAVE TO TEASE THAT
OUT IN TERMS OF WHAT THE
NEIGHBORHOOD OR THE OTHER THING
TOO IS YOU KNOW, THE TRAFFIC
CALMING PROGRAM IS VERY IT&apos;S
PETITION BASED SO THAT WE KNOW
THERE&apos;S FRONT END SUPPORT FROM
THE NEIGHBORHOOD THAT THEY WANT
THIS AND WE DON&apos;T HAVE THAT ON
SITE.
THAT&apos;S NOT TO SAY THAT THERE
WOULDN&apos;T BE SUPPORT IF A
PETITION WAS CIRCULATED.
BUT RIGHT NOW WE DON&apos;T HAVE
THAT PETITION ON FILE.
SO IT&apos;S WE DON&apos;T EVEN KNOW HOW
MUCH SUPPORT THERE WOULD BE FOR
TRAFFIC COMING.
SO I THINK IT&apos;S REALLY JUST
TRYING TO HONOR THE PROCESSES
THAT WE HAVE AND TRYING TO
CHANGE THOSE PROCESSES.
WE DON&apos;T REALLY HAVE A
PRECEDENT FOR THAT AND IT JUST
MAKES US A LITTLE NERVOUS AS
ALL THAT&apos;S HELPFUL.
ERIKA, BEFORE WE GO TO YOU, I
WANT TO JUST REMIND US OF WHAT
WE VOTED ON LAST MONTH.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO READ THE
SECTION OF THE MINUTES FROM
FROM LAST MONTH.
SO A MOTION WAS MADE BY ONE IN
SECONDED BY HOPE TO REMOVE
PARKING ON ONE SIDE OF THE
PROJECT AREA IN FAVOR OF AN ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES PROTECTED
BIKE LANE.
THE MOTION WAS APPROVED BY THE
COMMISSION AND FORWARDED TO
CITY COUNCIL SO IN TERMS
OF WHAT WE MIGHT RESCIND AND
WHAT WE MIGHT PUT FORWARD, WE
VOTED TO REMOVE A BIKE LANE OR
REMOVE PARKING AND WE VOTED FOR
PROTECTED BIKE LANE.
WE DID NOT VOTE ON THE SPECIFIC
ON A SPECIFIC DESIGN IS MY
UNDERSTANDING OF OF WHAT WE
MOVED AND WHAT WE&apos;RE
RECOMMENDING TO COUNCIL RAYMOND
DOES THAT IS THAT ACCURATE?
&gt;&gt; THAT IS ACCURATE.
I THINK THERE WAS ONE OF THE
CONCEPTS WAS SHOWN WHICH WAS
PARKING ON ONE SIDE WITH A
PROTECTED BIKE LANE ON ONE SIDE
AND THEN THE BIKE LANE ON THE
OUTSIDE OF THE PARKED CARS ON
THE OTHER SIDE MAYBE WITH SOME
VERTICAL ELEMENTS INCLUDED.
I THINK WE WOULD HAVE TO GO AND
KIND OF LOOK TO SEE LIKE THE
DETAILS OF HOW THAT WOULD WORK
.
BUT THAT&apos;S WHAT THAT WAS OUR
STARTING POINT RIGHT WAS TO
LOOK AT IT THAT WAY, THAT SORT
OF DESIGN.
OK, I BRING IT UP BECAUSE LAST
MONTH THERE WAS NOT SUPPORT FOR
REMOVING PARKING ON BOTH SIDES
WHICH I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THAT HAS
SHIFTED THAT WOULD POTENTIALLY
OPEN UP EVEN MORE DESIGN
POSSIBILITIES WOULD REMOVING
PARKING ON BOTH SIDES AGAIN
WITHOUT MAKING SPECIFIC
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR WHAT TO DO?
I WAS HEARING FROM NICK THAT
STAFF IS MAYBE LOOKING FOR
SLIGHTLY MORE SPECIFIC GUIDANCE
ON WHAT TO DO WITH THE DESIGN.
I&apos;M RELUCTANT TO GIVE SPECIFIC
GUIDANCE BECAUSE WE ARE NOT THE
EXPERTS AND ENGINEERS ON THE
SPECIFIC DESIGN.
SO I&apos;M JUST GOING TO LIKE LAY
THAT OUT THERE.
WE CAN KEEP TALKING ERIKA YEAH.
I THINK I APPRECIATE MR. HAS
KIND OF WHAT WE TALK ABOUT IN
TERMS OF OUR PROCESS AROUND
TRAFFIC AND I DO THINK THAT
SOMETHING HAS SHIFTED IN THE
PAST COUPLE OF YEARS WITH THE
ADOPTION OF OUR VISION ZERO
BASED TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
I MEAN WE HAVE A PLAN THAT IS
BASED AROUND THE CONCEPT
OF SAVING LIVES AND REDUCING
CRASHES AND IMPROVING THE SORT
OF LIVABILITY OF OUR COMMUNITY
AND IMPROVING OUR
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IN LARGE
BY REDUCING SPEEDS.
AND THAT WAS PRETTY WELL VETTED
IN OUR COMMUNITY AND THIS IS
LISTED AS AN ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES ROUTE IN THAT.
SO I DO THINK THAT I THINK
COMMUNITY WIDE THERE IS A REAL
DESIRE TO SEE US SHIFTING OUR
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK AND I
FEEL CONFIDENT IN SAYING THAT
BECAUSE THERE WAS JUST SUCH AN
INCREDIBLE PARTICIPATION IN
THIS TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WE&apos;RE
WE&apos;RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW
WE CAN DO IT.
AND I THINK ONE OF THE
CHALLENGES IS THAT WHEN WE
SEPARATE OUT AND HAVE OUR OUR
TRAFFIC COMING ENTIRELY
SEPARATE FROM OUR STREET
RESURFACING PROJECTS FROM OUR
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS
THAT THERE IS NO WAY THAT WE
POSSIBLY EVER MEET THAT DEMAND
.
I WOULD SUSPECT THAT YOU KNOW I
KNOW THAT THE A.E APARTMENT IS
OFTEN HEARING ABOUT SPEEDING AS
IT IS A COMMUNITY ISSUE.
IT&apos;S CERTAINLY THE TOP ISSUES
THAT I HEAR ON COUNCIL IS
COMMUNITY CONCERNS SPEEDING
THROUGH AND THROUGH
NEIGHBORHOODS AND SO UNLESS WE
START DEVELOPING A UNLESS WE
SHIFT OUR PHILOSOPHY AND REALLY
START TACKLING EACH STREET AS
WE AS WE GET TO THEM AS PART
OF OUR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PROCESS, I JUST DON&apos;T KNOW HOW
WE EVER WILL REALLY SHIFT OUR
NETWORK.
AND THIS IS ONE OF THESE REALLY
WIDE BIG NEIGHBORHOOD STREETS
THAT UNLESS WE WE SHIFT THE
DESIGN OF IT RIGHT NOW, YOU
KNOW, IT REALLY IT REALLY
SHOULDN&apos;T BE A REASON THAT YOU
SHOULDN&apos;T BE ABLE TO JUST TAKE
DOWN THAT STREET IN MY OPINION
WITHOUT PROTECTIVE FACILITIES.
THE REASON YOU CAN&apos;T BECAUSE
IT&apos;S WIDE AND AND CARS ARE
TRAVELING TOO QUICKLY OFTEN SO
I KNOW WHERE WE&apos;RE GOING TO
HAVE THIS TRAFFIC COMING
SUBCOMMITTEE.
I WOULD HOPE THAT WE GET A
FIRST MEETING SCHEDULED QUICKLY
ON THIS.
I WILL DEFER TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSIONER IN
TERMS OF HOW YOU WANT TO
PROCEED ON THIS.
I KNOW THAT FROM THE THE WORD
PERSPECTIVE THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S A
REAL INTEREST IN INTEGRATING
AND FOR MY PERSPECTIVE A REAL
INTEREST IN INTEGRATING SPEED
MANAGEMENT INTO THIS DESIGN AND
INTO PRETTY MUCH EVERY DESIGN
BECAUSE THE FORD BANKS ARE SO
I&apos;M GOING TO KEEP I&apos;M GOING TO
KICK IT BACK TO YOU FOR A
SECOND.
WE WE&apos;VE TALKED ABOUT
RESCINDING THE VOTE THAT WE
TOOK ORIGINALLY WITH THE IDEA
OF POSSIBLY REPLACING IT WITH A
DIFFERENT RECOMMENDATION.
&gt;&gt; YOU HAVING HAD THIS
DISCUSSION WHERE YOU ARE, I
THINK I&apos;M STILL COMING DOWN ON
THE SIDE OF WANTING TO RESCIND
THE VOTE THAT WE TOOK.
I THINK THAT IF WE I UNDERSTAND
THAT WE VOTED TO GET REMARKING
ON ONE SIDE IF THAT RESULTS IN
A DESIGN THAT HAS VERTICAL
ELEMENTS PROTECTING A BIKE LANE
THAT CARS HAVE TO DRIVE ACROSS
,WHICH IS WHAT IT SEEMS LIKE
THE SORT OF THE STARTING PLACE
OF IT IS THEN I JUST DON&apos;T
THINK THAT&apos;S GOING TO BE A PLAN
THAT SATISFIES ANYONE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD OR THE USERS
OF THAT STREET.
&gt;&gt; THAT IS I MEAN THAT&apos;S MY
THAT&apos;S WHERE I&apos;M AT AT THIS
POINT.
&gt;&gt; AND IS THERE SOMETHING THAT
YOU WOULD WANT TO WANT US TO
ALSO VOTE ON TO REPLACE THAT
TONIGHT?
I GUESS I WOULD LIKE STAFF TO
COME BACK WITH DIFFERENT
PROPOSAL.
OK, AND IF THEY OR I&apos;D LIKE TO
KNOW WHAT ENABLERS DO THEY NEED
IN ORDER TO COME UP WITH A
DIFFERENT PROPOSAL?
SO FOR EXAMPLE, DO THEY NEED
THE PROBLEM WITH THE SNOW
MAINTENANCE VEHICLES TO BE
SOLVED?
IS THAT THE ENABLER TO A DESIGN
WORKS BETTER FOR PEOPLE SO THEN
WE NEED TO FIGURE THAT OUT
BEFORE WE DECIDE ON WHAT THE
RIGHT SOLUTION IS FOR THIS OR
ANYTHING ELSE IN MY OPINION.
SO HELP ME OUT IN TERMS OF ANY
PARKING REMOVAL, THE PROCESS IS
GENERALLY THAT IT COMES TO
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION FIRST
AND WE MAKE A RECOMMENDATION OR
NOT AND THEN IT GOES TO COUNCIL
COUNCIL HAS TO VOTE ON REMOVING
OF PARKING, CORRECT?
CORRECT FOR ME MORE THAN ONE
BLOCK MORE THAN ONE BLOCK.
&gt;&gt; SO IF WE RESCIND THE MOTION
THAT CURRENTLY STANDS AND DON&apos;T
REPLACE IT ANY DESIGN THAT
REQUIRES REMOVAL OF PARKING
WOULD HAVE TO COME BACK TO US
AND THEN GO TO COUNCIL.
IS THAT CORRECT?
YES, I BELIEVE THAT TO BE TRUE.
REINEKE SO I AM HESITANT TO
RESCIND THE PREVIOUS MOTION
WITHOUT REPLACING IT WITH
APPROVAL FOR REMOVING PARKING
HERE BECAUSE I WORRY THAT IT
WILL SLOW THINGS DOWN EVEN
MORE.
MAYBE WE WANT TO SLOW DOWN
BECAUSE WE THINK STAFF NEEDS TO
COME UP WITH SOME OTHER DESIGNS
BEFORE IT MOVES FORWARD.
BUT I&apos;M TRYING TO GET LIKE I&apos;D
LIKE TO GET THE PULSE HERE A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHERE PEOPLE
HOW PEOPLE ARE FEELING ABOUT
THIS RIGHT NOW.
&gt;&gt; GO AHEAD.
SO IF WE IF WE RESCIND THE
APPROVAL TO REMOVE PARKING LOT
,COULD A DESIGN WITHOUT ANY
APPROVED OR PROTECTED LANES AT
ALL THE A VIABLE ALTERNATIVE OR
WOULD THAT BE THE DEFAULT?
I MEAN THEY COULD THEY COULD
PUT IN THEY COULD DO A PROJECT
WITH NO PARKING REMOVAL AND IT
WOULD NOT COME BACK TO US OR GO
TO COUNCIL.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, REP. I I GUESS FOR MY
PART I&apos;M HESITANT TO RESPOND
ALSO I I THINK THAT IN MY
OPINION TO MAKE THIS BETTER
WOULD INVOLVE A CONCERTED
EFFORT TO REDUCE LEADS AND TO
DO THAT WOULD BE WOULD REQUIRE
EITHER A SEA CHANGE AT CITY
HALL LIKE NICK MENTIONED AND I
THINK THAT&apos;S OUTSIDE OF THE
PURVIEW OF WHAT WE&apos;RE DOING
HERE AND SOMETHING I WOULD
ENCOURAGE AND I I THINK THAT WE
SHOULD EXPLORE THAT.
BUT YOU KNOW, IT SEEMS LIKE IF
IF THIS THE PROJECT TO GET WERE
TO GET BETTER THAN WHAT WE
ALREADY VOTED ON AT THE LAST
MEETING, IT WOULD REQUIRE THAT
KIND OF EFFORT AND OR OR DELAY
OF MORE THAN A YEAR.
AND I SO I&apos;M HESITANT TO
RESCIND WHAT WE GOT JUST
BECAUSE I DON&apos;T THINK THERE&apos;S
ANYTHING YOU KNOW, I THINK WE
NEED TO SUPPORT SOMETHING GOOD
NOW WITH THE TIMELINE THAT
THAT&apos;S IN PLACE, THE PROCESSES
THAT ARE IN PLACE BUT I WOULD I
GUESS LIKE TO SEE AN EFFORT
MADE IN A BIGGER PICTURE EFFORT
ABOUT INCORPORATING SPEED
MANAGEMENT INTO ALL PROJECTS
ARE ALL RESURFACING
RECONSTRUCTION PROCESSES.
I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT THIS IS THE
WAY TO FORCE THAT I&apos;M
UNCOMFORTABLE MAYBE GIVING UP
WHAT WE&apos;VE GOT IN A WAY TO
FORCE THAT AND MAY BE I DON&apos;T
KNOW, MAYBE UNSUCCESSFUL AT
THAT&apos;S WHERE I&apos;M AT.
&gt;&gt; THANKS, JULIE.
I MEAN I CAN SEE BOTH SIDES
OF THE ISSUES ABOUT RECENT NOT
RESCINDING.
I DO LIKE THE IDEA OF AT LEAST
KEEPING THE REMOVAL PARKING IN
THERE AND I IS ONE OF THE
PEOPLE WHO THOUGHT THAT
REMOVING IT FROM ONLY ONE SIDE
WOULD BE BETTER THAN REMOVING
FROM TWO SIDES.
BUT AS FAR AS THE THE SEA
CHANGE, I JUST FEEL LIKE IF WE
HAD DATA SHOWING IN THIS TWENTY
FIVE MILE PER HOUR NEIGHBORHOOD
STREET PEOPLE WERE REGULARLY
DRIVING THIRTY FIVE TO FORTY
MILES PER HOUR THEN THEN LIKE
THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S A PROBLEM THAT&apos;S
A CITY WIDE PROBLEM.
THAT&apos;S SOMETHING FOR THE
NEIGHBORS TO DECIDE.
THAT&apos;S HOW I FEEL ABOUT IT.
BUT WITHOUT ANY DATA ABOUT THAT
I DON&apos;T FEEL LIKE WE HAVE ANY
BUSINESS GOING OVER THEIR HEADS
.
THAT&apos;S HOW I FEEL.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
I WILL NOTE THAT WE CAN WE
COULD DO A YES AND SO WE&apos;VE
ALREADY VOTED TO APPROVE THE
REMOVAL OF PARKING ON ONE SIDE
IT DOES NOT SPECIFY A PROJECT
DESIGN.
WE COULD HAVE A RESOLUTION
TONIGHT THAT SAYS SOMETHING
ALONG THE LINES OF RECOMMENDING
SPEED MANAGEMENT IN IN WHATEVER
DESIGN GOES FORWARD AND OR
TRAFFIC CALMING THAT WAY THE
PARKING REMOVAL IS IS ALREADY
THERE ON THE RECORD AS WELL AS
THE DESIRE FOR ADDITIONS OR
CHANGES TO THE DESIGN.
BUT WE DON&apos;T SPECIFY WHAT THOSE
CHANGES ARE.
THAT&apos;S WHAT THAT&apos;S BASED ON HOW
THIS CONVERSATION IS GOING.
THAT&apos;S WHERE I&apos;M LEANING.
I&apos;M SEEING YOU NODDING.
I&apos;M SAYING MULTIPLE NODS SO I
CAN I MAKE A MOTION I NEVER
KNOW IF I CAN MAKE A MOTION.
I&apos;M ALWAYS ASKING FOR OTHER
PEOPLE TO MAKE MOTIONS.
DO I NEED TO MAKE RAYMOND DO I
NEED SOMEONE ELSE?
I I THINK YOU CAN GET GREAT
PLEASURE FROM HIM SO I MOVE
THAT WE RECOMMEND TO CITY
COUNCIL NOW MOLLY, I&apos;M SORRY.
&gt;&gt; I THINK I NEED SOMEONE ELSE
TO MAKE MOTION.
&gt;&gt; WELL NO I THINK PETE&apos;S
MOTION IS STILL ON THE FLOOR IF
REMEMBER DID YOU MAYBE CONSIDER
A FRIENDLY AMENDMENT TO PETE&apos;S
MOTION WHICH WAS THE RESCINDS
SO YOU WANT TO ADD THE AND BUT
I THINK YOU NEED TO HONOR HIS
MOTION.
&gt;&gt; IF I WASN&apos;T SURE IF IT WAS
EMOTION OR AN AGENDA ITEM, I
DIDN&apos;T THINK WE&apos;D ACTUALLY
MOVED IT YET.
OH, YOU MIGHT BE RIGHT.
YOU HAVE QUICKLY MY NOTES ARE
LONG ON THIS.
I&apos;M TRYING TO SEE YEAH YOU
MIGHT BE RIGHT.
I THINK IT WAS MOVED ONTO THE
AGENDA BUT I DON&apos;T THINK I&apos;M ON
THE FLOOR.
PETE, IS THAT CONSISTENT WITH
YOUR RECOLLECTION OF MY SHOT?
&gt;&gt; OK, THANK YOU.
OK GREAT.
SO WE DON&apos;T CURRENTLY HAVE
MOTION SO I&apos;M GOING TO MOVE
SOMETHING I&apos;M GOING TO MOVE
THAT WE RECOMMEND THE
INCORPORATION OF SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND OR TRAFFIC
COMING.
I&apos;M USING BOTH OF THOSE TERMS
BECAUSE REASONS SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND OR TRAFFIC
COMING IN THE DESIGN OF THIS
PROJECT AND WE LEAVE THE
PARKING ON THE ONE SIDED
PARKING REMOVAL AS WE CURRENTLY
HAVE IT.
BRETT, I WONDER IF WE SHOULD
SEE ADDITIONAL SPEED MANAGEMENT
BECAUSE LIKE AS RAYMOND SAID,
THERE&apos;S ALREADY CUT OUTS
ALREADY LATE NARROWING IN THE
DESIGN SO I MEAN THEY COULD
JUST COME BACK AND SAY WELL
THIS HAS THOSE CONDITIONS THAT
WE WANT TO SEE MORE ENCOURAGE
MORE OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT TO
RECOMMEND ADDITIONAL SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND OUR TRAFFIC
COMING IN THE DESIGN.
WE HAVE ALSO HEARD AND I AGREE
WITH THE DESIRE TO HAVE DATA
ABOUT THE SPEEDS AS THIS THE
RIGHT PLACE TO MENTION THE SHOW
WE CAN PUT IT ALL WE CAN MOVE
WHATEVER WE WANT.
ALL WE DO IS ADVISING RECOMMEND
IN THE DESIGN FOR SOMETHING
GREENVIEW AND TO GATHER SPEED
DATA LIKE ON THE REGION ON THE
BAY AREA.
WHAT&apos;S PROJECT OK, I&apos;M GOING TO
READ IT BACK SO I MOVE.
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS ADDITIONAL SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND OR TRAFFIC
COMING IN THE DESIGN FOR THE
7TH AND GREENVIEW PROJECT AND
THAT THE CITY GATHERS SPEED
DATA ON THE SECTION UNDER
DISCUSSION.
CAN I GET A SECOND RATE?
ALL RIGHT.
DO WE NEED ANY FURTHER
DISCUSSION ON THIS OR CAN WE
VOTE MALI BASED ON WHAT YOU
JUST READ IT?
I DON&apos;T THINK I HEARD YOU SAY
WHETHER THE EXISTING REMOVAL
PARKING ON ONE SIDE THAT I
MISSED THAT WE&apos;RE NOT GOING TO
TOUCH IT BECAUSE WE ALREADY
RECOMMENDED THE REMOVAL
OF PARKING ON ONE SIDE.
&gt;&gt; SO WE&apos;RE GOING TO LEAVE THAT
THERE.
OK, SO THAT STILL STANDS.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS KIND OF ON TOP
OF THIS AND YES, OK, ERIKA, I I
SUPPORT THIS OBVIOUSLY THE THE
INTEGRATION OF SPEED MANAGEMENT
.
I&apos;M JUST GOING TO POINT OUT
THAT IF I THINK THAT IF WE IF
WE&apos;RE A CITY APPROACHING THIS
FROM THE STARTING POINT THAT
WAS KIND OF LEADING THE SPEECH
SPEED MANAGEMENT ON A
NEIGHBORHOOD STREET LIKE THIS
WE MIGHT END UP WITH A VERY
DIFFERENT DESIGN THAT THAN SOME
OF THE DESIGNS THAT WERE
APPROVED LAST MONTH.
AND SO I THINK IT WHEN IT
BECOMES EVEN MORE COMPLICATED
FOR STAFF TO TRY TO MELT SOME
OF THIS TOGETHER AND END UP
WITH A WITH A DESIGN THAT WORKS
BUT IT&apos;S THE POINT IS TO HAVE
THIS ACTUALLY FUNCTION LIKE A
NEIGHBORHOOD STREET LIKE IN MY
OPINION IT SHOULD IT SHOULD
FUNCTION AND YOU KNOW, THAT&apos;S
NOT THE SAME DESIGN NECESSARILY
THAT WE END UP WITH ON AN
ARTERIAL.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO WE DIDN&apos;T BECAUSE WE DIDN&apos;T
RECOMMEND A SPECIFIC DESIGN
LAST ON THEM.
WE&apos;RE STILL NOT RECOMMENDING A
SPECIFIC DESIGN.
I THINK THIS IS OPEN ENDED
ENOUGH THAT IF SAFE CAME BACK
WITH AN ENTIRELY DIFFERENT
DESIGN THAT STILL REMOVES
PARKING ON ONE SIDE IT LIKE
WE&apos;VE LAID OUT RECOMMENDATIONS
THAT WOULD SET UP CITY COUNCIL
TO APPROVE SUCH A PLAN WITHOUT
IT COMING BACK TO US.
THAT&apos;S HOW I INTERPRET WHAT WE
DID LAST MONTH AND WHAT WE
MIGHT BE ABOUT TO DO.
DID YOU HAVE YOUR HAND UP?
I WAS JUST ABOUT TO SAY WHAT
YOU JUST SAID ACTUALLY.
&gt;&gt; OK, GREAT COOL NOT SEEING
ANY OTHER HANDS SO WE&apos;RE GOING
TO VOTE ON THIS ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF RECOMMENDING
ADDITIONAL SPEED MANAGEMENT AND
OR TROPICAL IN THE DESIGN AND
GATHERING SPEED ON THE SECTION
NO TIME OUT.
WHAT&apos;S IT DO WE GET A SECOND ON
THAT?
&gt;&gt; IF WE DID I DIDN&apos;T RECORD
IT.
MY APOLOGIES.
WE DID I THINK IT WAS BRET OK,
I MOVED IT AND I THINK BRET
SECONDED IT.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
GREAT.
OK, ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND OR
SAY YES.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED OH I SEE
LARRY RASTETTER ANY ABSTENTIONS
?
MOTION PASSES UNANIMOUSLY.
THANK YOU EVERYONE FOR THIS
VERY RESPECTFUL DISCUSSION.
I APPRECIATE THAT WE CAME BACK
TO THIS BECAUSE I DIDN&apos;T FEEL
GREAT AFTER LAST MONTH ON THIS
ONE AND NOW WE ARE GOING TO
MOVE ON TO INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION WITH A FEDERAL
FUNDING OVERVIEW FROM RYAN BUCK
.
GOOD EVENING.
NEWS .
&gt;&gt; HE&apos;S READY TO TALK ABOUT
FEDERAL PROCESS.
YEAH, AND I&apos;M GOING TO TRY TO
SHARE MY SCREEN HERE BEAR WITH
ME
.
SO WORK EVERYONE SEE IT PERFECT
ALL RIGHT.
.
SO THE WASHTENAW AREA
ALL RIGHT.
TRANSPORTATION STUDY I&apos;M GOING
SO THE WASHTENAW AREA
TO TALK A LITTLE ABOUT A LITTLE
TRANSPORTATION STUDY I&apos;M GOING
BIT ABOUT OURSELVES FEDERAL
TO TALK A LITTLE ABOUT A LITTLE
FUNDING, REGIONAL PROCESS.
BIT ABOUT OURSELVES FEDERAL
YOU KNOW, I&apos;VE I&apos;VE BEEN AT
FUNDING, REGIONAL PROCESS.
WATTS FOR TWENTY YEARS AND I
YOU KNOW, I&apos;VE I&apos;VE BEEN AT
DON&apos;T KNOW THAT I&apos;VE EVER
WATTS FOR TWENTY YEARS AND I
EXPLAINED WHAT I DO OR WHAT
DON&apos;T KNOW THAT I&apos;VE EVER
WATTS IS THE SAME WAY.
EXPLAINED WHAT I DO OR WHAT
SO IT&apos;LL BE INTERESTING TO SEE
WATTS IS THE SAME WAY.
HOW IT COMES OUT TONIGHT.
SO IT&apos;LL BE INTERESTING TO SEE
I THINK ONE OF THE MOST
HOW IT COMES OUT TONIGHT.
INTERESTING WAYS AND MAYBE
I THINK ONE OF THE MOST
CONCISELY IS THAT I HEARD IT
INTERESTING WAYS AND MAYBE
EXPLAINED WAS AN ORION STANTON
CONCISELY IS THAT I HEARD IT
ARTICLE WHEN HE SAID HE STARTED
EXPLAINED WAS AN ORION STANTON
IT WITH SAYING WHAT&apos;S A
ARTICLE WHEN HE SAID HE STARTED
CREATURE OF FEDERAL LAW?
IT WITH SAYING WHAT&apos;S A
AND I THINK THAT&apos;S ABSOLUTELY
CREATURE OF FEDERAL LAW?
IT&apos;S JUST SPOT ON.
AND I THINK THAT&apos;S ABSOLUTELY
&gt;&gt; SO THANK RYAN FOR IT FOR
IT&apos;S JUST SPOT ON.
DOING THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO THANK RYAN FOR IT FOR
I INCLUDED THIS SLIDE JUST SORT
DOING THAT.
OF A RESOURCE I THINK RAYMOND
I INCLUDED THIS SLIDE JUST SORT
IS GOING TO BE ABLE TO
OF A RESOURCE I THINK RAYMOND
DISTRIBUTE THIS.
IS GOING TO BE ABLE TO
THERE&apos;S INFORMATION ON OUR LONG
DISTRIBUTE THIS.
RANGE PLAN WHO WE ARE, THE LONG
THERE&apos;S INFORMATION ON OUR LONG
RANGE PLAN BEING THE SORT
RANGE PLAN WHO WE ARE, THE LONG
OF VISIONARY DOCUMENT, THE
RANGE PLAN BEING THE SORT
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT
OF VISIONARY DOCUMENT, THE
PROGRAM, THE SORT OF LIST
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT
OF PROJECTS.
PROGRAM, THE SORT OF LIST
I&apos;LL TALK ABOUT THESE IN A
OF PROJECTS.
LITTLE MORE DETAIL AND SOME
I&apos;LL TALK ABOUT THESE IN A
OF THE OTHER THINGS THAT WE&apos;VE
LITTLE MORE DETAIL AND SOME
PRODUCED BUT SORT OF WHAT IS
OF THE OTHER THINGS THAT WE&apos;VE
WHAT&apos;S I MEAN BEING INVOLVED IN
PRODUCED BUT SORT OF WHAT IS
TRANSPORTATION, YOU KNOW THAT
WHAT&apos;S I MEAN BEING INVOLVED IN
THERE&apos;S JUST SORT OF CACOPHONY
TRANSPORTATION, YOU KNOW THAT
OF OF JURISDICTIONS DESIGN
THERE&apos;S JUST SORT OF CACOPHONY
REQUIREMENTS, FUNDING SOURCES,
OF OF JURISDICTIONS DESIGN
REGULATORY AGENCIES.
REQUIREMENTS, FUNDING SOURCES,
IT&apos;S JUST A LOT OF GOBBLEDYGOOK
REGULATORY AGENCIES.
AND IT&apos;S DIFFICULT TO SORT
IT&apos;S JUST A LOT OF GOBBLEDYGOOK
OF SORT THAT OUT AND WORK WITH
AND IT&apos;S DIFFICULT TO SORT
IT AND WE TRY TO DO THAT.
OF SORT THAT OUT AND WORK WITH
WE&apos;RE A MULTI JURISDICTIONAL
IT AND WE TRY TO DO THAT.
PLANNING AGENCY WITH WITH
WE&apos;RE A MULTI JURISDICTIONAL
MEMBERS.
PLANNING AGENCY WITH WITH
SO THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR,
MEMBERS.
WASHINGTON GOVERNMENT, MANY
SO THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR,
OF THE LARGER TOWNSHIPS, THE
WASHINGTON GOVERNMENT, MANY
CITIES AND VILLAGES THROUGHOUT
OF THE LARGER TOWNSHIPS, THE
THE COUNTY, WE BRING ALL THOSE
CITIES AND VILLAGES THROUGHOUT
PEOPLE TOGETHER AND THE PUBLIC
THE COUNTY, WE BRING ALL THOSE
AND WE TRY TO ACT AS A BRIDGE
PEOPLE TOGETHER AND THE PUBLIC
BETWEEN ALL THOSE PLAYERS AND
AND WE TRY TO ACT AS A BRIDGE
ALL THE CONFUSING RULES IN THE
BETWEEN ALL THOSE PLAYERS AND
END A LOT OF IT DOES COME DOWN
ALL THE CONFUSING RULES IN THE
TO MONEY AND ACCESSING FEDERAL
END A LOT OF IT DOES COME DOWN
FUNDS IS A PROCESS AND IT FALLS
TO MONEY AND ACCESSING FEDERAL
ON US TO SORT OF FACILITATE
FUNDS IS A PROCESS AND IT FALLS
THAT PROCESS LOCALLY.
ON US TO SORT OF FACILITATE
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
THAT PROCESS LOCALLY.
SO GOING BACK QUITE A LONG
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
WAYS, THIS IDEA OF REGIONAL
SO GOING BACK QUITE A LONG
TRANSPORTATION PLANNING KIND
WAYS, THIS IDEA OF REGIONAL
OF CAME ON THE HEELS AT LEAST
TRANSPORTATION PLANNING KIND
HERE CAME ON THE HEELS
OF CAME ON THE HEELS AT LEAST
OF INVESTMENT IN THE INTERSTATE
HERE CAME ON THE HEELS
SYSTEM.
OF INVESTMENT IN THE INTERSTATE
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF MONEY THAT WAS
SYSTEM.
SORT OF BEGINNING TO FLOW AND
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF MONEY THAT WAS
THE FEDS WERE SAYING IF YOU&apos;RE
SORT OF BEGINNING TO FLOW AND
GOING TO GET ALL THIS MONEY
THE FEDS WERE SAYING IF YOU&apos;RE
THAT&apos;S GREAT.
GOING TO GET ALL THIS MONEY
BUT WE KIND OF WANT YOU TO WORK
THAT&apos;S GREAT.
TOGETHER TO FIGURE OUT HOW IT&apos;S
BUT WE KIND OF WANT YOU TO WORK
GOING TO BE SPENT AND SOME
TOGETHER TO FIGURE OUT HOW IT&apos;S
OF THAT STATE FUNDING, SOME
GOING TO BE SPENT AND SOME
OF THAT&apos;S ADMINISTERED BY THE
OF THAT STATE FUNDING, SOME
STATE, SOME OF IT&apos;S
OF THAT&apos;S ADMINISTERED BY THE
ADMINISTERED BY LOCAL
STATE, SOME OF IT&apos;S
MUNICIPALITIES.
ADMINISTERED BY LOCAL
THEY SAID WE&apos;RE HAPPY TO GIVE
MUNICIPALITIES.
YOU THIS MONEY BUT YOU HAVE TO
THEY SAID WE&apos;RE HAPPY TO GIVE
WORK TOGETHER TO FIGURE OUT
YOU THIS MONEY BUT YOU HAVE TO
WHO&apos;S GOING TO GET WHAT AND
WORK TOGETHER TO FIGURE OUT
WHAT&apos;S GOING TO HAPPEN.
WHO&apos;S GOING TO GET WHAT AND
SO FORMERLY WE WERE ESTABLISHED
WHAT&apos;S GOING TO HAPPEN.
IN NINETEEN SEVENTY FOUR AT
SO FORMERLY WE WERE ESTABLISHED
THAT POINT IT WAS JUST
IN NINETEEN SEVENTY FOUR AT
URBANIZED AREA.
THAT POINT IT WAS JUST
IT WASN&apos;T THE ENTIRE COUNTY BUT
URBANIZED AREA.
THERE WAS A LOT OF PEOPLE
IT WASN&apos;T THE ENTIRE COUNTY BUT
INVOLVED IN WASHOE COUNTY
THERE WAS A LOT OF PEOPLE
GOVERNMENT THAT SAID WE WANT TO
INVOLVED IN WASHOE COUNTY
SORT OF MAINTAIN AS MUCH
GOVERNMENT THAT SAID WE WANT TO
AUTONOMY AS WE CAN IN
SORT OF MAINTAIN AS MUCH
TRANSPORTATION FUNDING AND
AUTONOMY AS WE CAN IN
POLICY DECISIONS LOCALLY
TRANSPORTATION FUNDING AND
BECAUSE THIS WAS AT THE SAME
POLICY DECISIONS LOCALLY
TIME THAT REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
BECAUSE THIS WAS AT THE SAME
IS HAPPENING WITH SOME COD AND
TIME THAT REGIONAL GOVERNMENT
SO IT WASN&apos;T THAT THERE WAS
IS HAPPENING WITH SOME COD AND
DISAGREEMENT WITH SOME, IT WAS
SO IT WASN&apos;T THAT THERE WAS
THAT WE WANT TO BE ABLE TO
DISAGREEMENT WITH SOME, IT WAS
RETAIN SOME OF THE DECISION
THAT WE WANT TO BE ABLE TO
MAKING POWER HERE AND A LARGE
RETAIN SOME OF THE DECISION
PART OF THAT IS BECAUSE THERE&apos;S
MAKING POWER HERE AND A LARGE
A SEPARATE URBAN AREA THAT
PART OF THAT IS BECAUSE THERE&apos;S
WE&apos;RE DEALING WITH.
A SEPARATE URBAN AREA THAT
THERE&apos;S THE DETROIT URBAN AREA
WE&apos;RE DEALING WITH.
AND THERE&apos;S THE ANN ARBOR URBAN
THERE&apos;S THE DETROIT URBAN AREA
AREA AND THERE&apos;S A LOT OF SORT
AND THERE&apos;S THE ANN ARBOR URBAN
OF PLAY BETWEEN BUT THEY&apos;RE
AREA AND THERE&apos;S A LOT OF SORT
DIFFERENT.
OF PLAY BETWEEN BUT THEY&apos;RE
AND SO THE IDEA OF MAINTAINING
DIFFERENT.
SOME AUTONOMY IN THE DECISION
AND SO THE IDEA OF MAINTAINING
MAKING, IDENTIFYING OUR OWN
SOME AUTONOMY IN THE DECISION
VALUES WAS SOMETHING THAT THE
MAKING, IDENTIFYING OUR OWN
LEADERS IN THE AREA THOUGHT WAS
VALUES WAS SOMETHING THAT THE
IMPORTANT.
LEADERS IN THE AREA THOUGHT WAS
FIFTY YEARS AGO.
IMPORTANT.
SO METROPOLITAN PLANNING
FIFTY YEARS AGO.
ORGANIZATION AND EXPO IS
SO METROPOLITAN PLANNING
SOMETHING THAT YOU HAVE PERHAPS
ORGANIZATION AND EXPO IS
HEARD ABOUT AND IT&apos;S
SOMETHING THAT YOU HAVE PERHAPS
INTERESTING I PUT THIS IN THE
HEARD ABOUT AND IT&apos;S
PRESENTATION BECAUSE WE&apos;RE NOT
INTERESTING I PUT THIS IN THE
ACTUALLY AN NGO.
PRESENTATION BECAUSE WE&apos;RE NOT
WE&apos;RE THIS ONE UNIQUE INSTANCE
ACTUALLY AN NGO.
IN THE ENTIRE COUNTRY BUT AN
WE&apos;RE THIS ONE UNIQUE INSTANCE
NGO RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS
IN THE ENTIRE COUNTRY BUT AN
CONTINUING COOPERATIVE AND
NGO RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PROCESS, A THREE
CONTINUING COOPERATIVE AND
STEP PROCESS AND THAT IS THAT&apos;S
COMPREHENSIVE PROCESS, A THREE
REQUIRED IN ALL AREAS WITHIN
STEP PROCESS AND THAT IS THAT&apos;S
WITH AN URBAN AREA POPULATION
REQUIRED IN ALL AREAS WITHIN
OF GREATER THAN FIFTY THOUSAND
WITH AN URBAN AREA POPULATION
.
OF GREATER THAN FIFTY THOUSAND
NOW IF YOU HAVE AN URBAN AREA
.
WITH A POPULATION OF GREATER
NOW IF YOU HAVE AN URBAN AREA
THAN TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND,
WITH A POPULATION OF GREATER
THERE ARE MORE REQUIREMENTS
THAN TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND,
THAT YOU HAVE TO DO.
THERE ARE MORE REQUIREMENTS
SO WE&apos;RE IN THIS THIS WEIRD
THAT YOU HAVE TO DO.
SITUATION WHERE OUR THE
SO WE&apos;RE IN THIS THIS WEIRD
URBANIZED AREA IS GREATER THAN
SITUATION WHERE OUR THE
TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND.
URBANIZED AREA IS GREATER THAN
SO WE&apos;RE SORT OF YOU WOULD
TWO HUNDRED THOUSAND.
THINK BY DEFINITION ONE
SO WE&apos;RE SORT OF YOU WOULD
OF THESE LARGE EXPO&apos;S BUT WE
THINK BY DEFINITION ONE
ACTUALLY FALL WITHIN THE
OF THESE LARGE EXPO&apos;S BUT WE
PURVIEW OF SOME KOG WHEN IT
ACTUALLY FALL WITHIN THE
COMES TO THE REGIONAL PROCESS.
PURVIEW OF SOME KOG WHEN IT
BUT WE HAVE A NUMBER OF EMUS
COMES TO THE REGIONAL PROCESS.
WITH SOME KIND.
BUT WE HAVE A NUMBER OF EMUS
THEY RESPECT OUR AUTONOMY AND
WITH SOME KIND.
OUR POLICY COMMITTEE&apos;S
THEY RESPECT OUR AUTONOMY AND
DECISIONS AND TALK ABOUT THAT
OUR POLICY COMMITTEE&apos;S
IN JUST A MOMENT.
DECISIONS AND TALK ABOUT THAT
BUT IT IS A UNIQUE
IN JUST A MOMENT.
CIRCUMSTANCE.
BUT IT IS A UNIQUE
IT&apos;S THERE ISN&apos;T A SINGLE OTHER
CIRCUMSTANCE.
INSTANCE OF THIS IN THE UNITED
IT&apos;S THERE ISN&apos;T A SINGLE OTHER
STATES WHERE YOU HAVE
INSTANCE OF THIS IN THE UNITED
TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT AREA
STATES WHERE YOU HAVE
ONE OF THOSE LARGE URBAN AREAS
TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT AREA
WITHIN THE BOUNDS AND THE
ONE OF THOSE LARGE URBAN AREAS
CONFINES OF ANOTHER EXPO SORRY
WITHIN THE BOUNDS AND THE
SLIDES ARE NOT ADVANCING THERE.
CONFINES OF ANOTHER EXPO SORRY
SO HOW WATTS&apos;S SET UP WE HAVE A
SLIDES ARE NOT ADVANCING THERE.
POLICY COMMITTEE AND THAT IS
SO HOW WATTS&apos;S SET UP WE HAVE A
ALL OF OUR MEMBER AGENCIES.
POLICY COMMITTEE AND THAT IS
WE RELY ON OUR MEMBER AGENCIES
ALL OF OUR MEMBER AGENCIES.
FOR A SMALL DUSE OR PAY A SMALL
WE RELY ON OUR MEMBER AGENCIES
AMOUNT OF MONEY AND WE USE THAT
FOR A SMALL DUSE OR PAY A SMALL
TO MATCH FEDERAL FUNDS.
AMOUNT OF MONEY AND WE USE THAT
THAT&apos;S HOW WE OPERATE OUR
TO MATCH FEDERAL FUNDS.
AGENCY SO 80 PERCENT OF OUR
THAT&apos;S HOW WE OPERATE OUR
OPERATIONS IS FUNDED DIRECTLY
AGENCY SO 80 PERCENT OF OUR
BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND
OPERATIONS IS FUNDED DIRECTLY
WE HAVE TO COME UP WITH A LOCAL
BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND
SHARE.
WE HAVE TO COME UP WITH A LOCAL
OUR LOCAL SHARE IS MADE UP
SHARE.
OF THE DUES PAYING MEMBERS.
OUR LOCAL SHARE IS MADE UP
SO AS I MENTIONED BEFORE, THE
OF THE DUES PAYING MEMBERS.
CITY THE NRA, ALL THE CITIES
SO AS I MENTIONED BEFORE, THE
AND VILLAGES WITHIN THE COUNTY
CITY THE NRA, ALL THE CITIES
COUNTY GOVERNMENT ITSELF
AND VILLAGES WITHIN THE COUNTY
WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMISSION.
COUNTY GOVERNMENT ITSELF
SO OUR POLICY COMMITTEE IS THE
WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMISSION.
DECISION MAKING BODY IN TERMS
SO OUR POLICY COMMITTEE IS THE
OF THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT.
DECISION MAKING BODY IN TERMS
&gt;&gt; THEY&apos;RE THE ONES THAT HAVE
OF THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT.
TO BE IN PERSON NOW WE ALSO
&gt;&gt; THEY&apos;RE THE ONES THAT HAVE
HAVE A TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
TO BE IN PERSON NOW WE ALSO
WHICH IS MADE UP OF TECHNICAL
HAVE A TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
OFFICIALS THAT ADVISE THE
WHICH IS MADE UP OF TECHNICAL
COMMITTEE AND THEN WE ALSO HAVE
OFFICIALS THAT ADVISE THE
A FEDERAL LEAD COMMITTEE WHICH
COMMITTEE AND THEN WE ALSO HAVE
FUNCTIONS AND THERE ARE FEDERAL
A FEDERAL LEAD COMMITTEE WHICH
COMMITTEES IN ALL OF THE SEVEN
FUNCTIONS AND THERE ARE FEDERAL
COUNTIES IN SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN.
COMMITTEES IN ALL OF THE SEVEN
BUT OURS FUNCTIONS DIFFERENTLY.
COUNTIES IN SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN.
OURS IS MORE A SORT OF A
BUT OURS FUNCTIONS DIFFERENTLY.
MEETING OF THE MINDS OF THE
OURS IS MORE A SORT OF A
LOCAL IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES TO
MEETING OF THE MINDS OF THE
COME UP WITH A SUITE
LOCAL IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES TO
OF PROJECTS THAT WE CAN DISCUSS
COME UP WITH A SUITE
AS A AS A PUBLIC BODY.
OF PROJECTS THAT WE CAN DISCUSS
THE PROCESS DOESN&apos;T WORK BY
AS A AS A PUBLIC BODY.
JUST SAYING WE&apos;VE GOT SEVEN
THE PROCESS DOESN&apos;T WORK BY
MILLION DOLLARS TO SPEND THIS
JUST SAYING WE&apos;VE GOT SEVEN
YEAR.
MILLION DOLLARS TO SPEND THIS
WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO?
YEAR.
WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT
WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO?
THERE&apos;S PROJECTS THAT CAN BE
WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT
DELIVERED THAT WE CAN DISCUSS
THERE&apos;S PROJECTS THAT CAN BE
AND SO WE WORK WITH THE LOCAL
DELIVERED THAT WE CAN DISCUSS
AGENCIES TO COME UP WITH THE
AND SO WE WORK WITH THE LOCAL
LIST OF PROJECTS THAT CAN BE
AGENCIES TO COME UP WITH THE
DELIVERED AND MOVE FORWARD AND
LIST OF PROJECTS THAT CAN BE
THEN WE WORK WITH THE PUBLIC TO
DELIVERED AND MOVE FORWARD AND
DISCUSS THAT.
THEN WE WORK WITH THE PUBLIC TO
WE WORK THROUGH THE TECHNICAL
DISCUSS THAT.
COMMITTEE AND OUR POLICY
WE WORK THROUGH THE TECHNICAL
COMMITTEE IN OTHER AREAS
COMMITTEE AND OUR POLICY
OF SOME OF THE REST OF THE
COMMITTEE IN OTHER AREAS
COUNTIES THERE.
OF SOME OF THE REST OF THE
FEDERAL AID COMMITTEE IS MUCH
COUNTIES THERE.
CLOSER TO A DECISION MAKING
FEDERAL AID COMMITTEE IS MUCH
BODY.
CLOSER TO A DECISION MAKING
IT IS THOSE LOCAL JURISDICTIONS
BODY.
BUT THEY SET A LIST OF PROJECTS
IT IS THOSE LOCAL JURISDICTIONS
AND THAT IS THE LIST
BUT THEY SET A LIST OF PROJECTS
OF PROJECTS THAT IS INCLUDED
AND THAT IS THE LIST
AND ULTIMATELY GETS FUNDED.
OF PROJECTS THAT IS INCLUDED
SO HERE IT&apos;S ADVISORY IN OTHER
AND ULTIMATELY GETS FUNDED.
AREAS IT&apos;S A DECISION MAKING
SO HERE IT&apos;S ADVISORY IN OTHER
BODY AND THEN THERE&apos;S ME AND WE
AREAS IT&apos;S A DECISION MAKING
HAVE I&apos;M HAPPY TO SAY AS
BODY AND THEN THERE&apos;S ME AND WE
OF MONDAY WE&apos;RE BACK UP TO A
HAVE I&apos;M HAPPY TO SAY AS
TOTAL STAFF OF FOUR.
OF MONDAY WE&apos;RE BACK UP TO A
IT&apos;S BEEN IT&apos;S BEEN A
TOTAL STAFF OF FOUR.
CHALLENGE.
IT&apos;S BEEN IT&apos;S BEEN A
SO THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR HAS
CHALLENGE.
PARTICIPATED IN WHAT&apos;S FROM THE
SO THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR HAS
VERY, VERY BEGINNING OUR POLICY
PARTICIPATED IN WHAT&apos;S FROM THE
COMMITTEE WRAPPED THE ELECTED
VERY, VERY BEGINNING OUR POLICY
OFFICIAL IS S.M BRIGS.
COMMITTEE WRAPPED THE ELECTED
THE TECH REP IS RAYMOND HAAS
OFFICIAL IS S.M BRIGS.
AND WE ALSO HAVE SUZANNE
THE TECH REP IS RAYMOND HAAS
FLOWERS, WATTS ALUM WHO IS THE
AND WE ALSO HAVE SUZANNE
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ALTERNATIVE
FLOWERS, WATTS ALUM WHO IS THE
AND NICK HUTCHINSON WHO SERVES
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE ALTERNATIVE
ON THE FEDERAL COMMITTEE.
AND NICK HUTCHINSON WHO SERVES
SO WHEN WE&apos;RE DEALING WITH
ON THE FEDERAL COMMITTEE.
FIGURING OUT WHAT PROJECTS ARE
SO WHEN WE&apos;RE DEALING WITH
ABLE TO MOVE FORWARD THAT WE
FIGURING OUT WHAT PROJECTS ARE
WANT TO DISCUSS AS A REGION,
ABLE TO MOVE FORWARD THAT WE
NICK IS A PERSON WHO
WANT TO DISCUSS AS A REGION,
PARTICIPATES ON THE CITY&apos;S
NICK IS A PERSON WHO
BEHALF IN THAT PROCESS.
PARTICIPATES ON THE CITY&apos;S
ULTIMATELY WE ARE TALKING ABOUT
BEHALF IN THAT PROCESS.
MONEY AND PROJECTS BUT WE DO
ULTIMATELY WE ARE TALKING ABOUT
HAVE OTHER FUNCTIONS NOT AS
MONEY AND PROJECTS BUT WE DO
MUCH WITH THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
HAVE OTHER FUNCTIONS NOT AS
WHEN WE&apos;RE DEALING
WITH SMALLER
COMMUNITIES THAT DON&apos;T HAVE THE
RESOURCES OF A LARGER CITY OR
THE COUNTY, WE CAN PROVIDE A
LOT MORE ASSISTANCE THERE.
BUT WE WE ADMINISTER THIS
PLANNING PROCESS.
WE TRY TO BE A PUBLIC FORUM AS
MUCH AS WE CAN WHERE WE
STRUGGLE THOUGH AS WE&apos;RE NOT
TALKING ABOUT THE THE DETAILS
OF PROJECT DESIGN, WE&apos;RE
TALKING ABOUT VISIONS.
AND SO WHEN WE HAVE PUBLIC
MEETINGS IT&apos;S SHOULD SAFETY BE
A PRIORITY?
IT&apos;S NOT THE TYPE OF THING THAT
PEOPLE COME OUT AND GET REALLY
EXCITED ABOUT AND SO GETTING
THEM ENGAGED HAS BEEN A HUGE
CHALLENGE FOR US.
WE TRY NEW THINGS ALL THE TIME
TO VARYING LEVELS OF SUCCESS
BUT WE DO AS PART OF OUR LONG
RANGE PLAN COME UP WITH A
VISION THE SET OF SHARED VALUES
FOR WASHTENAW COUNTY.
RAYMOND SAID EARLIER, YOU KNOW
NOT EVERYONE LIKE SPEED BUMPS.
NOT EVERYONE HAS THE SAME
VISION FOR THE TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM AS AS WE DO IN THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
AND SO IT&apos;S BRINGING THOSE
PEOPLE TOGETHER, FINDING THOSE
SORT OF COMMON GOALS AND TRYING
TO COME UP WITH PROJECTS THAT
PROMOTE THEM AND I PUT THIS
QUOTE HERE OUR JOB IS TO GET
PROJECTS OUT THE DOOR.
CARMEN LEMBO AND I THINK THAT&apos;S
IMPORTANT FOR US AS SORT
OF TECHNOCRATS TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE&apos;RE NOT SORT OF GETTING
IN THE WAY OF GETTING THINGS
DONE.
WE OF COURSE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE MONEY IS SPENT AS
EFFICIENTLY AS POSSIBLE BUT WE
DON&apos;T WANT TO GET IN THE WAY WE
RECOGNIZE OURSELVES AS WHAT&apos;S
AS AN ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY,
NOT AN IMPLEMENTING AGENCY.
WE DO NOT DO DESIGN.
&gt;&gt; WE WORK ON PROCESS AND SO
SOMETIMES WE HAVE A FANTASTIC
RELATIONSHIP WITH THEM WHEN WE
APPROVE THINGS GENERALLY IN
TERMS OF PROJECTS THAT GETS
INCLUDED IN REGIONAL DOCUMENTS
.
SOME OF MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION, ALL OF THEIR
FEDERAL FUNDS HAVE TO
ESSENTIALLY GET VETTED OR
PASSED THROUGH US.
THAT&apos;S NOT THE CASE WITH STATE
FUNDS OR WITH FEDERAL FUNDS OR
LARGE PROJECTS GET VOTED ON AT
THE LAST TABLE.
SO WHEN THERE WAS DISCUSSION
OF US TWENTY THREE WIDENING
THAT WAS VOTED ON AT THE LAST
TABLE WHEN THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S
UPCOMING DISCUSSIONS OF FUNDING
FOR MAJOR EXPANSIONS OF TWENTY
THREE AND NINETY FOUR, THOSE
ARE THINGS THAT GET DISCUSSED
AND VOTED ON AT THE LAST LEVEL.
&gt;&gt; ULTIMATELY THINGS ARE
APPROVED.
WE WORK OUR SORT OF SECTION
OF OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT WE
MOST COMMONLY DEAL WITH IS A
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION.
WE ALSO SOMETIMES DEAL WITH FDA
AND OTHER BRANCHES OF USDOT BUT
FEDERAL HIGHWAY IS THE ONES WHO
WE GENERALLY DEAL WITH ON THE
FED SIDE AND THERE&apos;S ALSO AN
ASSOCIATION OF ORGANIZATIONS
SUCH AS WHAT&apos;S ACROSS THE
STATE, THE MICHIGAN
TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
ASSOCIATION AND SO OVER TIME
OVER THE APPROACHING 50 YEARS
THAT WE&apos;VE BEEN DOING THIS,
WE&apos;VE ESTABLISHED A PROCESS
THAT I THINK WORKS REALLY WELL.
OUR MEMBER AGENCIES PLAY VERY
NICELY IN THE SANDBOX WITH EACH
OTHER.
BUT SORT OF HOW HOW DO PROJECTS
ACTUALLY GET DONE?
I WANT TO TALK ABOUT SORT
OF THE PLANNING PROCESS TO A
CERTAIN EXTENT WE HAVE THIS
LONG RANGE PLAN.
THIS IS THE VISION THIS IS AND
I LIKE TO THINK OF OURS AS MORE
OF SORT OF A MASTER PLAN THAT
SETS SUCH THAT VISION IT
IDENTIFIES GOALS, STRATEGIES TO
GET THERE.
ULTIMATELY IT DOES HAVE A
FINANCIAL CONSTRAINED LIST
OF PROJECTS.
BUT THE FACT THAT IT&apos;S THAT
POLICY GUIDE IS SOMETHING THAT
I THINK CAN SOMETIMES GET LOST
IN LONG RANGE TRANSMISSION
REGIONAL LONG RANGE
TRANSPORTATION PLANS WE WANT TO
PROVIDE GUIDANCE ESPECIALLY FOR
SMALLER COMMUNITIES TO
UNDERSTAND THAT SHARED SET
OF VALUES.
AND SO THIS IS STRAIGHT FROM
OUR LONG RANGE PLAN BROKE THIS
INTO A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
SLIDES EQUITY WE LIST IT&apos;S NOT
BY ACCIDENT THAT EQUITY IS
LISTED AS OUR TOP GOAL EXACTLY
HOW WE EFFECTUATE CHANGE THERE
IS SOMETHING THAT WE STRUGGLE
WITH BUT WE RECOGNIZE THAT THAT
IS THE THING THAT IS THE GOAL
THAT WE ARE INTERESTED IN
ACCOMPLISHING AND SAFETY IS
RIGHT THERE AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; ACCESS AND MOBILITY MANY
OF THE GOALS THAT YOU WOULD
ANTICIPATE ENVIRONMENT,
TRANSPORTATION, LAND USE,
INVESTING STRATEGICALLY AND
ENGAGING THE PUBLIC AGAIN I
MENTIONED THE IMPORTANCE
OF ACTING AS SORT OF A CONDUIT
FOR PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT IN THIS
CHALLENGING SET
OF JURISDICTIONS DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS AND DIFFERENT SETS
OF FUNDS BECAUSE OF THAT
CHALLENGE ALL THESE DIFFERENT
COMPETING INTERESTS WE TRIED TO
SIMPLIFY THE WAY THAT WE TALKED
ABOUT FUNDING AND PROJECTS IN
OUR LONG RANGE PLAN BECAUSE
THERE ARE JUST DOZENS OF THEM
AND WITH EVERY NEW BILL AND
EVERY NEW SORT OF NEW INFUSION
OF MONEY, THAT LIST OF TYPES
OF FUNDING INCREASES ALL THAT
DOES IN MY MIND IS CONFUSE THE
PUBLIC MORE.
AND SO WHAT I WANTED TO DO AND
WE WANTED TO DO IS WHEN WE
CREATED THE PLAN WAS FOCUS ON
THE TYPES OF OUTCOMES WE&apos;RE
LOOKING AT AND AND MATCHING
THEM OUT WITH THE GOALS AND THE
VALUES THAT WE&apos;VE HEARD FROM
OUR PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT PROCESS
IN DEVELOPING THE PLAN.
SO AGAIN, WE HAVE EQUITY WHERE
WE WANT TO IDENTIFY THAT AS
SORT OF THE MOST THE DRIVER
OF THE DECISIONS AND THEN WE
HAVE PAVEMENT OOPS EXCUSE ME
WHICH WE TARGET AT FORTY FIVE
PERCENT OF FEDERAL INVESTMENT
MOVING FORWARD.
TWENTY PERCENT FOR SAFETY, 10
PERCENT FOR BRIDGES, FIFTEEN
PERCENT FOR ENVIRONMENT AND
CONGESTION 10 PERCENT 10
PERCENT FOR NOT MOTORIZED
TRANSIT FUNDING IS GENERALLY
HANDLED DIFFERENTLY.
SO THESE ARE SORT OF THESE
POLICY TARGET GOALS BUT IT&apos;S
IMPORTANT TO UNDERSTAND THAT SO
MANY PROJECTS IMPACT DIFFERENT
GOALS AND SO IT&apos;S HARD TO TRACK
THIS.
BUT WHAT WE WERE TRYING TO GET
AT IS WITH SOMETHING LIKE
ENVIRONMENT AND CONGESTION
THERE&apos;S THE FEDERAL PROGRAM,
THE CONGESTION MANAGEMENT AND
AIR QUALITY PROGRAM WE THAT IS
A DEDICATED FUNDING SOURCE FOR
CERTAIN TYPES OF PROJECTS THAT
SORT OF IMPROVE THE AIR
QUALITY.
WHAT WE WANTED WHAT WE WANTED
TO GET ACROSS BY ORGANIZING OUR
PLAN LIKE THIS WAS IF THAT
FUNDING GOES AWAY THAT&apos;S STILL
A PRIORITY IN TERMS OF OUTCOMES
FOR US.
SO WE DON&apos;T CARE WHAT FUNDING
SOURCE BUT THIS IS THE TYPE
OF INVESTMENT THE LEVEL
OF INVESTMENT THAT WE FEEL AS A
REGION MOST CLOSELY REFLECTS
THE VALUES IN THE PLAN C. SO
THE LONG RANGE PLAN IS THAT
GUIDING VISIONARY DOCUMENT.
BUT IN ORDER TO ACTUALLY GET
MONEY TO TO DELIVER AND
CONSTRUCT ACTUAL PROJECTS
SOMETHING HAS TO BE LISTED IN
THE TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT
PROGRAM.
THE TTIP AND IT&apos;S A FOUR YEAR
LIST OF FUNDED IMPROVEMENTS.
SO IT&apos;S FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED
AND IN THIS DOCUMENT ALL THOSE
DIFFERENT FUNDING SOURCES ARE
LISTED SEPARATELY THAT CHANGES
FROM TIME TO TIME.
WE AMEND IT THREE TIMES PER
YEAR SOMETIMES THOSE CAN BE
MINOR CHANGES AND MODIFICATIONS
THAT CAN HAPPEN AT THE STAFF
LEVEL FOR EXTENDING A PROJECT
ANOTHER TWENTY OR THIRTY FEET.
BUT IF IT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT
REALLY CHANGES THE SCOPE OF THE
PROJECT WE HAVE ANOTHER CHANCE
FOR PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT AND
ANOTHER ROUND THAT GOES THROUGH
OUR TECHNICAL COMMITTEE OR OUR
POLICY COMMITTEE THROUGH SOME
KIND AND AND FEDERAL HIGHWAY IN
THE INTEREST OF TIME I&apos;M NOT
GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE WONKY
ADVANCED CONSTRUCT PROJECT IN
TERMS TYPES OF FUNDING AND I
THINK THIS IS IMPORTANT THERE
ARE FEDERAL FUNDS THAT WHAT
CONTROLS SO WE DECIDE AS THE
POLICY COMMITTEE DECIDES WHAT
PROJECTS GET FUNDED.
THERE ARE ALSO FUNDING SOURCES
WHERE WE PRIORITIZE OR
INFLUENCE THEM BUT WE DON&apos;T
NECESSARILY CONTROL THEM AND
THEN THERE&apos;S OTHERS THAT WE
SORT OF JUST SUPPORT AND
BECAUSE WE HAVE A STRONG
REGIONAL PROCESS, THE SUPPORT
FROM OUR AGENCY MEANS SOMETHING
IMPORTANT TO LOOKING AT THOSE
FUNDS.
&gt;&gt; WHAT&apos;S CONTROLS GENERALLY IF
YOU HEAR SOMEONE TALK ABOUT
WHAT&apos;S DOLLARS THEY&apos;RE PROBABLY
TALKING ABOUT THE SURFACE
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM THAT IS
THE LARGEST SOURCE OF FORMULA
FUNDING THAT COMES INTO US AND
FOR THE URBAN AREA AND SO
THAT&apos;S LARGER THAN JUST THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
THAT&apos;LL BE THE URBAN TOWNSHIPS,
THE CITY OF YPSILANTI.
WE GET AN ORDER OF MAGNITUDE
FIVE OR SIX MILLION DOLLARS A
YEAR AND WE HAVE TO SPEND EVERY
SINGLE DOLLAR THAT&apos;S ALLOCATED
TO US THAT EXACT YEAR AND JUST
DOING THAT ACCOUNTING IS A BIG
PART OF THAT REGIONAL PROCESS.
SO IF THERE&apos;S A CITY OF ANN
ARBOR PROJECT THAT IS GOING TO
GO OVER BY A FEW HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS, WE CAN&apos;T
NECESSARILY JUST MAKE THAT UP
HERE AND SO WE HAVE TO WORK
WITH ALL THE LOCAL IMPLEMENTING
AGENCIES TO MAKE SURE THAT THIS
BALANCES OUT ACROSS ALL THE
DIFFERENT FUNDING SOURCES.
THERE&apos;S ALSO A PROCESS FOR
FUNDING PROJECTS OUTSIDE OF THE
URBAN AREA AND THEN THERE&apos;S
THESE SPECIAL PURPOSE FUNDS
THAT COME IN FROM TIME TO TIME
.
THERE WERE THROUGH THE PANDEMIC
THERE WERE MILLIONS OF MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS IN ADDITION TO WHAT
WE NORMALLY EXPECT THROUGH OUR
FORMULA ALLOCATIONS THAT WE HAD
TO PRIORITIZE AND QUICKLY AT
THAT.
BUT THOSE WERE FUNDS THAT WE
CONTROL AND THERE&apos;S FUNDING
SOURCES THAT WE PRIORITIZE SO I
TALKED OR MENTIONED CONGESTION
MITIGATION, AIR QUALITY EARLIER
.
I THINK THAT IS THE BEST
EXAMPLE OF THE TYPES OF FUNDS
THAT WE PRIORITIZE LOCALLY.
ULTIMATELY THE DECISION ON
SEMAK RESTS WITH THE MPO BUT
BECAUSE OF OUR SPECIAL
RELATIONSHIP WITH SANCHI,
BECAUSE OF OUR STANCE AS A
SEPARATE URBANIZED AREA, WE
HAVE WORKED OUT A PROCESS WHERE
WE ACTUALLY PRIORITIZE
WASHTENAW COUNTY SEMAK PROJECTS
WHICH ALLOWS US TO MAXIMIZE THE
FUNDS COMING INTO THE COUNTY
GOING BACK TO SORT OF THE
PURPOSE OF HOW WE LAID OUT THE
LONG RANGE PLAN.
THE IDEA IS TO MAXIMIZE THE
FUNDS REGARDLESS OF THE FUNDING
SOURCE TO ACCOMPLISH THE GOALS
THAT ARE LISTED THERE AND THEN
PRIORITIZE WITH A SMALL URBAN
FUND PROBABLY IS NOT THE RIGHT
WORD THAT I SHOULD BE USING
HERE WE FACILITATE THE
PRIORITIZATION IN THOSE SMALLER
URBAN AREAS SO CHELSEA AND
MILEN RECEIVE FUNDING EVERY
THREE YEARS AND WE FACILITATE
THE GROUP THAT DECIDES WHO
WANTS OR WHAT WILL BE FUNDED
THERE BECAUSE THERE ARE SMALL
TRANSIT INTERESTS AS WELL AND
THEN TYPES OF PROJECTS THAT WE
SUPPORT TAP TRANSPORTATION
ALTERNATIVE PROGRAMS SAFETY
BRIDGE MAY HAVE HEARD OF ALL
THESE THESE DIFFERENT FUNDING
SOURCES.
WE DON&apos;T HAVE DIRECT CONTROL
OVER THEM EVEN THOUGH IN
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES LIKE TAP
THERE IS AN ALLOCATION IN THE
LAW THAT THAT IS FOR OUR URBAN
AREA.
BUT THE ALLOCATION OF DTAP THAT
WE WOULD GET IF IT WAS A DIRECT
ALLOCATION TO WATTS OR THE
ANNIVERSARY NICE AREA IS ABOUT
FOUR HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS A
YEAR AND WORKING WITH SIMCOCK
AND BECAUSE OUR PARTNERS IN
WASHINGTON COUNTY ARE SO
AGGRESSIVE WITH THEIR TAP
APPLICATIONS WE GET ROUTINELY
THREE OR MORE TIMES THAT IN A
GIVEN YEAR.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
AND SO HOW DO WE PRIORITIZE AND
FOR THE MOST PART WHEN I TALK
ABOUT PRIORITIES PRIORITIZATION
AGAIN IT&apos;S IT&apos;S ABOUT THAT
SERVICE TRANSPORTATION, URBAN
DOLLARS THAT FIVE, SIX MILLION
DOLLARS THAT WE HAVE DIRECT
CONTROL OVER AND WE HAVE TO
WORK WITH THE LOCAL URBAN
IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES TO DECIDE
WHAT PROJECTS MOVE FORWARD.
WE HAVE POINTS BASED
APPLICATION AND SO FOR EACH
OF THOSE GOALS THERE ARE
QUESTIONS THAT WE ASK WHETHER
OR NOT SOMETHING IS A TRANSIT
ROUTE, HOW HOW DENSE THE AREA
IS, PRESENCE OF NON MOTORIZED
FACILITIES OR LACK THEREOF.
THERE ARE QUESTIONS THAT MATCH
EACH OF THOSE GOALS THAT ALLOWS
US TO COME UP WITH A SORT
OF INITIAL PRIORITIZATION JUST
SIMPLY BASED ON POINTS.
BUT I&apos;M A FIRM BELIEVER THAT
YOU CAN&apos;T MAKE DECISIONS SIMPLY
BASED ON POINTS AND THAT&apos;S
WHERE WE GET INTO THE MEETINGS
OF THE FEDERAL AID COMMITTEE
WHERE WE ESTABLISH WHICH
PROJECTS CAN MOVE FORWARD AND
WHEN THEY COULD POTENTIALLY
MOVE FORWARD ONCE WE
ESTABLISHED THAT LIST
OF POTENTIAL POTENTIAL SUITE
OF PROJECTS THEN WE THAT THAT
LIST THROUGH THE PUBLIC, ALL
OF THE OTHER PROJECTS IF
THEY&apos;RE NOT HIDDEN FROM THE
PUBLIC THEY ARE PRESENTED AS
WELL.
BUT IS THAT COMMITTEE THAT&apos;S
THE FIRST TIME WHERE WE HAVE A
LIST OF PROJECTS THAT&apos;S
CONSIDERED FOR MOVING FORWARD
AND ULTIMATELY FOR FUNDING JUST
A COUPLE OTHER THINGS WE DO A
TRAVEL DEMAND MODEL IS
SOMETHING THAT WE&apos;RE REQUIRED
TO HAVE THAT IS A COMPUTER
PROGRAM THAT LOOKS AT
DEMOGRAPHICS AND TRAVEL
PATTERNS AND BASED ON EXPECTED
OR POTENTIAL CHANGES IN THE
FUTURE WILL ESTIMATE TRAVEL ON
THE SYSTEM, CONGESTION ON THE
SYSTEM.
&gt;&gt; THEY ARE LARGELY OUTDATED
TOOLS BECAUSE THEY WERE USED
FOR WHEN WE&apos;RE TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT WHICH LOCATION WOULD PUT A
HIGHWAY AND NOT HOW TO
PRIORITIZE SAFETY AND NON
MOTORIZED INVESTMENT BUT IT&apos;S
STILL A REQUIREMENT.
TACTICAL URBANISM WAS SOMETHING
THAT WAS CHAMPIONED BY SUZANNE
FLOWERS WHEN SHE WAS AT LOTS
AND SOMETHING THAT WE CONTINUE
NOW ACTUALLY JUST WITHIN THE
NEXT WEEK IF THEY&apos;RE NOT
ALREADY UP IN CHELSEA THERE&apos;S A
VERTICAL SORT OF WAVE LOOKING
DELINEATOR THAT WE BORROWED
FROM THE LEAGUE OF MICHIGAN.
BICYCLISTS ARE GOING UP ON
FREYR ROAD WHICH WE&apos;RE EXCITED
ABOUT AND THEN WE ALSO DO NO
DISCOUNT PROGRAM.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE A PRETTY COOL ON OUR
WEBSITE THERE&apos;S A NON MOTORIZED
MAP THAT YOU CAN CLICK ON ALL
THE DIFFERENT LOCATIONS THAT
WE&apos;VE DONE.
WE HAVE PERMANENT COUNTERS, WE
HAVE A PERMANENT COUNTER AND
GALIT PARK WE HAVE TWO INDEXER
WE HAVE ONE IN PITTSFIELD
TOWNSHIP.
WE HAVE TWO MOBILE COUNTERS
THAT WE CAN GO AND MOVE AROUND
AND DO COUNTS WITH THAT WE&apos;VE
DONE IN LOTS OF LOCATIONS
WITHIN THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR AS
WELL AS BUT IN TERMS OF WHAT
HAVE YOU DONE FOR ME LATELY I
HAD I JUST LOOKED AT THE LIST
OF PROJECTS AND SO THIS IS
GOING BACK TO LAST THREE YEARS
AND THE TIP FOR TWENTY THREE TO
TWENTY SIX IS AS IT EXISTS NOW
SO FROM FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
TWENTY THROUGH TWENTY TWENTY
SIX THERE&apos;S TWENTY MILLION
OF FEDERAL FUNDS GOING TOWARDS
CITY MAIN HARBOR PROJECTS AND
IT&apos;S NOT AN INSIGNIFICANT
AMOUNT OF MONEY OBVIOUSLY THE
CITY IS ONE OF OUR LARGER
MEMBERS BUT THERE&apos;S A LOT
OF MONEY THAT FLOWS THROUGH
LOTS AND IT&apos;S NOT JUST FOR ME
IT&apos;S FOR THE CITIES AND THE
ROAD TO AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; SO WE JUST RECENTLY ADOPTED
THAT BRAND NEW TRANSPORTATION
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM, THAT LIST
OF OF FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED
PROJECTS FROM TWENTY THREE
THROUGH TWENTY SIX KNOW WE HAVE
THE THE IJA INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENT AND JOBS ACT WHICH
IS THE I DON&apos;T KNOW DEBATABLY
MORE COMMONLY CALLED THE
BIPARTISAN INFRASTRUCTURE LAW.
&gt;&gt; WE HEAR ABOUT THESE
GROUNDBREAKING TRANSFORMATIVE
NEW FUNDING PACKAGES COME IN
UNFORTUNATELY COSTS GO UP
INFLATION AND EVERY TIME WE GET
ONE OF THOSE NEW GROUNDBREAKING
THINGS FOR THE MOST PART IT
JUST SORT OF KEEPS IT.
IT&apos;S THE STATUS QUO.
THE CHANGE THAT CAME WITH THIS
IS A LOT MORE SORT OF EARMARK
FUNDING SORT OF NOT FORMAL
FUNDING, DISCRETIONARY FUNDING
.
EXACTLY HOW THAT PLAYS OUT IT&apos;S
A LITTLE UNCLEAR.
WE&apos;LL SEE WHAT HAPPENS WITH
SOME APPLICATIONS THAT HAVE
HAPPENED LOCALLY EVEN WITH THE
CITY OF BANABA, WE&apos;VE HAD A LOT
OF STAFF CHANGES, YOU KNOW,
EVER SINCE SUZANNE LEFT IT&apos;S
BEEN A REAL CHALLENGE AND THIS
IS SOMETHING THAT&apos;S NOT JUST
WATTS&apos;S ACROSS THE ENTIRE STATE
AND THE COUNTRY AT AGENCIES
LIKE US BUT WE&apos;RE ALSO WE DO
LOCAL PERFORMANCE MEASURES.
THE FEDERAL LAW SETS A NUMBER
OF PERFORMANCE MEASURES THAT
THE STATE HAS TO ESTABLISH AND
WORK WITH THE EMPLOYEES.
BUT WE KIND OF TOOK IT A STEP
FURTHER WITH THE DEVELOPMENT
OF OUR TWENTY FORTY FIVE LONG
RANGE PLAN AND IDENTIFIED LOCAL
PERFORMANCE MEASURES.
THOSE ARE AVAILABLE ON OUR
WEBSITE BUT I&apos;M LOOKING TO
UPDATE THOSE NOW WITH NEW
BASELINE DATA AND THAT IS GOING
TO KICK US OFF INTO THE
DEVELOPMENT OF THE TWENTY FIFTY
LONG RANGE PLAN AND AGAIN SO
THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S THE VISION THAT
MASTER PLAN HOW WE WANT TO SEE
THE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
DEVELOP YET ALSO A LIST
OF FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED
PROJECTS.
THAT IS ALL I HAVE FOR TODAY.
I APPRECIATE THE INVITATION
RAYMOND TO TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHAT&apos;S FEDERAL FUNDING,
THE REGIONAL PROCESS, HOW WE
WORK WITH SOME CARD.
I&apos;M HAPPY TO ANSWER QUESTIONS
NOT JUST HERE AT THE MEETING
BUT PLEASE FEEL FREE TO REACH
OUT TO ME EMAIL OR CALL.
I&apos;M HAPPY TO TALK SOME OF THE
MORE WONKY STUFF TO GREAT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THIS WAS I THIS WAS GREAT.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF STUFF ABOUT
COUNTY I&apos;VE ALWAYS WONDERED
ABOUT SO THIS IS TERRIFIC.
ANY QUESTIONS
.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
GIVEN THAT WE ARE SHORT ON TIME
I THINK I&apos;M GOING TO HUSTLE US
THROUGH.
THANK YOU SO MUCH, RYAN AND
THANKS FOR STICKING AROUND.
THIS WAS GREAT.
NEXT UP IS THE STATE AND HILL
PROJECT WITH THERESA BRIDGES.
HELLO.
THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
I APPRECIATE THE OPPORTUNITY TO
BRING FORWARD THE STATE AND
HILL STREETS IMPROVEMENT
PROJECT AGAIN SO I WILL GO
AHEAD AND SHARE MY SCREEN SHARE
COMING THROUGH NETWORK.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
SO AS YOU MAY REMEMBER, STAYTON
HILL IS STATE STREET FROM
GRANGER TO SOUTH TO UNIVERSITY
AND ITS HILL STREET FROM 5TH TO
CHURCH IS WHERE WE&apos;RE DOING
RESURFACING.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE DOING A LITTLE SAFETY
IMPROVEMENT BEYOND THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO WATER RECONSOLIDATION
RESURFACING SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS
,THE SCHEDULE AND TIMELINE
HERE WE ARE MID-OCTOBER
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETING NUMBER TWO.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE SUBMITTED TO MEET
WITH OUR 80 PERCENT DESIGN
PLANS.
WE&apos;VE GONE FOR PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT TWICE AND WE HAVE
BEEN WORKING WITH OUR
STAKEHOLDERS AS WE MOVE FORWARD
WITH THE DESIGN THE PROJECT
GOALS SPECIFIC TO TRANSPORT
ISSUE COMMISSION INCLUDED
CROSSWALK SAFETY ENHANCING
SAFETY AND VISIBILITY AT
CROSSWALKS ENHANCED WITH
ENHANCED PAVEMENT MARKINGS,
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAGE, POSITIVE
PRESS STREET LIGHTING, ENHANCED
CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS,
DINING WITH REFLECTIVE POST
SHEETING PUMP OUTS, RECTANGULAR
RAPID FLASHING BEACONS AND
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS.
THE NON VISUAL CROSSWALK
SYSTEMS OR MAKING INTERSECT OR
QUADRANTS APPS READY WHICH
INVOLVES GRADING AND ADA
COMPLIANCE OF THE RAMPS.
&gt;&gt; NOW I&apos;M MOTORIST SAFETY
INCLUDED ENHANCED PAVEMENT
MARKINGS AT INTERSECTIONS SO
THIS IS THE INTERSECTION
OF STATE STREET AND PACKARDS
STREET AND STREET.
&gt;&gt; YOU&apos;LL SEE WE&apos;VE GOT THE
BIKE LANE GREEN PAVEMENT
MARKINGS GOING THROUGH THE
INTERSECTIONS PROVIDING
GUIDANCE FOR THE WHERE THE
BIKERS AS WELL AS THE VEHICLES
TO USE CAUTION WHEN CROSSING.
ALSO WE TOOK A LOOK AT THE
BICYCLE INFRASTRUCTURE AND
WHERE THERE ARE GAPS IN THE
BICYCLE NETWORK TODAY IN THE
PROJECT AREA AND OF COURSE
THERE IS A DESIRE FOR AN ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES FRIENDLY
FACILITY AND NETWORK.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;VE HIGHLIGHTED HERE WHERE
THE PROJECT LIMIT IS WHICH
TURNS OUT TO BE
SOMEWHAT OF A
CONSTRAINT WHEN WHEN WE&apos;RE
LOOKING AT CONNECTING CITY
WITHIN THE NETWORK.
&gt;&gt; SO THE DESIGN THAT WE ARE
MOVING FORWARD WITH AT THIS
POINT ON STATE STREET WE&apos;VE GOT
GRANGER TO ARCH WHICH IS JUST
SOUTH HOOVER.
&gt;&gt; WE HAD AN EXISTING
CONFIGURATION THAT INCLUDED
CONVENTIONAL BIKE LANES ALL THE
WAY UP TO ARCH.
&gt;&gt; THERE IS CURBSIDE LANE
PARKING AND I WILL MENTION THAT
THE METERED PARKING IS
CONTROLLED BY THE DENHA EVEN
THOUGH WE&apos;RE OUTSIDE OF THE
DA&apos;S DISTRICT THEY HAVE CONTROL
AND AUTHORITY OVER PARKING
METERS.
SO ANY DECISIONS TO REMOVE
PARKING HAS TO BE APPROVED.
IT HAS TO BE MADE BY THEM
REALLY REQUESTS GO TO THEM FOR
REMOVING PARKING.
SO WE&apos;VE HAD MANY CONVERSATIONS
WITH THE D.A. REGARDING THE
PARKING THAT WILL REMAIN AND
THE PARKING THAT WE HAVE
PROPOSED TO REMOVE AT THIS
TIME.
SO GRANGER ARCH, WE WILL HAVE
OFFERED BIKE LANES ALONG THAT
ENTIRE CORRIDOR AND INCLUDE
SOME OF THE CURBSIDE LANE
PARKING.
THIS SHOWS YOU THE CROSS
SECTION HOW IT IS TODAY WHERE
THEY HAVE FIVE FOOT BIKE LANES
SPECIFICALLY BETWEEN RANGER AND
DEWEY.
THAT&apos;S ONLY ONE BLOCK BUT THEY
HAVE THE FIVE FOOT BIKE LANES
THAT INCLUDE THE GUTTERS AND 12
FOOT TRAVEL LANES.
THE PROPOSED CONFIGURATION WILL
HAVE A FIVE FOOT BIKE LANE ALSO
INCLUDING THE GUTTER BUT IT
INCREASES IT ALLOWS FOR A ONE
AND A HALF FOOT BUFFER WHEN WE
REDUCE THE TRAVELING WIDTH TO
TEN AND A HALF FEET WITH THIS
CONFIGURATOR TION THERE IS A
POTENTIAL TO INSTALL FOR ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES
THAT THE
BOLLARD POTENTIAL I BRING THE
POTENTIAL UP AS IT&apos;S BEEN
DISCUSSED EARLIER TODAY THE
MAINTENANCE ASPECT OF BOLLAND
INSTALLATION WE&apos;RE NOT THERE
YET BUT WHAT I&apos;M UNDERSTANDING
FROM CONVERSATIONS THAT WE HAD
OUR STAFF HAS HAD WITH DPW THE
MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT WOULD
ALLOW FOR MAINTENANCE ON CLEAR
SPACES OF FIVE FEET.
SO WHERE I NOTE THAT THERE IS
BOLLARD POTENTIAL IT&apos;S BECAUSE
WE CAN PUT BOLLARDS IN AND
STILL HAVE A CLEAR SPACE
OF FIVE FEET THEN WE GO FROM
DHUEY TO ARCH.
SO THAT IS THREE OR FOUR BLOCKS
AND WE HAD CONVENTIONAL BIKE
LANES.
WE HAD METERED PARKING LANE
WITH NO DOORS SWING BUFFER AND
THE PROPOSED CONFIGURATION AT
THIS TIME IS AN EIGHT FOOT
PARKING LANE, A TWO AND A HALF
FOOT DOOR SWING BUFFER, A FOUR
AND A HALF FOOT LANE AND A
NARROW BUFFER WITH TEN AND A
HALF FOOT TRAVEL LANES.
THEN ANOTHER NARROW BUFFER.
LASTLY, A FOUR AND A HALF FOOT
BIKE LANE ON THE EAST SIDE.
NOW THE NARROW BUFFER IS WHAT
WE&apos;RE STARTING TO USE WHEN
WE&apos;RE RETROFITTING BIKE LANES
INTO EXISTING CURB FACES AND WE
HAD PREVIOUSLY BEEN INSTALLING
SIX INCH PAVEMENT MARKINGS AS A
BIKE LANE LINE AND AS YOU&apos;VE
ALL EXPERIENCED THE CARS DON&apos;T
RESPECT IT VERY MUCH FOR LACK
OF A BETTER TERM AND WITH THE
DOUBLE WHITE LINE WE&apos;VE NOTICED
THAT THERE IS A DIFFERENT
BEHAVIOR TO THE DOUBLE WHITE
LINE.
IT IS IT&apos;S OBVIOUSLY A WIDER
AMOUNT OF SPACE BECAUSE YOU&apos;VE
GOT 12 INCHES INSTEAD OF SIX
INCHES BUT THAT IS SOMETHING
THAT WE&apos;RE EMPLOYING A LOT
OF IN THIS DESIGN.
SO ARCHER PARK I&apos;M SORRY ARCH
TO PACARD INCLUDES ARCH TO
HOOVER AND HOOVER TO PACKARD.
NOW WE&apos;RE NOT DOING ANY
IMPROVEMENTS FROM HOOVER TO
PACKARD.
OUR PROJECT IS GAPPED IN THAT
LOCATION BUT ONE OF THE BIG
STICKING POINTS TO THE DESIGN
PREVIOUSLY HAS BEEN THIS BLOCK
FROM ARCH TO HOOVER BECAUSE
OF THE LEFT TURN LANE AS WELL
LANES AND WE HONESTLY DIDN&apos;T
HAVE ENOUGH ROOM FOR EVERYTHING
WE HAVE FIGURED OUT A WAY TO
MOVE THE CURB A TAD WITHOUT
GETTING INTO YOU OF M PROPERTY
AT THE CORNER OF HOOVER AND ST.
AND SO WE KEEP THE TURN LANES
AND WE PROPOSE BUFFERED BIKE
LANES WHICH IS AN IMPROVEMENT
FROM HAVING NOTHING AT ALL
HAVING MERELY SHIRO&apos;S OR I
DON&apos;T EVEN THINK SHERRILLS ARE
MARKED IN THIS AREA SO WHAT WE
HAD BEFORE WERE VERY A VERY
WIDE SOUTHBOUND LANE.
OF COURSE WE&apos;RE GOING TO
PROVIDE CONSISTENT TEN AND A
HALF FOOT LANES THAT ALLOW FOR
BUSSES FOUR AND A HALF FOOT
BIKE LANES WITH NARROW BUFFERS
.
THEN THE SECTION STATE STREET
FROM HEKKER TO SOUTH
UNIVERSITY.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;VE GOT A LOT OF DIFFERENT
A LOT OF DIFFERENT TYPES
OF CROSS SECTIONS IN THIS AREA
AND WE&apos;VE GOT A LOT
OF DIFFERENT WIDTH TO THE CURB
FACES.
SO WE&apos;RE TRYING TO PROPOSE THE
MOST CONSISTENT AMOUNT
OF CONNECTIVITY SO NORTH
OF PACARD THERE WEREN&apos;T ANY
BIKE LANES AND NOW WE ARE
PROPOSING BIKE LANES WHETHER
THEY&apos;RE BUFFORD OR THEY&apos;RE
CONVENTIONAL IT&apos;S AN
IMPROVEMENT TO THE EXISTING
CONFIGURATION.
&gt;&gt; NOW FIRST WE START AT THE
STATE AND PACARD INTERSECTION
AGAIN THAT WAS PREVIEWED
EARLIER IN THE PRESENTATION.
&gt;&gt; SO WE MOVED WE ADDED ALL THE
BIKE PAVEMENT PARKING
ENHANCEMENTS AND A BUMP FOR OUR
STREET BECAUSE IT WAS AN ON
SIGNAL.
IT IS AN UNSEEN CROSSWALK FROM
PACKARD TO HILL.
WE&apos;VE GOT THE BUSINESSES ON THE
WEST SIDE AND THE RESIDENTIAL
ON THE EAST SIDE.
WE&apos;RE KEEPING SIX PARKING
SPACES HAVING A DOOR SWING
BUFFER, A FOUR AND A HALF FOOT
BIKE LANE NARROW BUFFER TEN AND
A HALF FOOT TRAVEL LANES AND
NARROW BUFFER AND FOUR AND A
HALF FOOT BIKE LANE.
THESE ON THE EAST SIDE HAS A
POTENTIAL FOR THAT.
IF WE PUT BOLLARDS HERE THEN WE
WOULD HAVE A FIVE FOOT CLEAR
SPACE FROM HILL TO MADISON.
WE HAD TWO LANES OF PARKING SO
WE&apos;VE ASKED TO REDUCE ONE LANE
OF PARKING SO THAT WE COULD FIT
BIKE LANES AND WE&apos;LL HAVE A
DOOR SWING BUFFER.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;LL HAVE THE SMALLER BIKE
LANES AND THE TEN AND A HALF
FOOT TRAVEL LANES AND THEN FROM
MADISON TO SOUTH TO UNIVERSITY
THAT LAST BLOCK AT THE NORTH
END OF THE PROJECT WE STILL
HAVE A TWO FOOT BUFFER BOTH
BECAUSE WE LOST A FOOT
OF EXISTING FACE TO FACE CURB
WITH WE HAD TO REDUCE THE BIKE
LANE AND BUFFER OVER ON HILL
STREET.
&gt;&gt; YOU CAN SEE THERE ARE
SHIRO&apos;S RIGHT NOW FROM ABOUT
DIVISION ALL THE WAY TO ALMOST
OAKLAND BECAUSE OF THE TURN
LANES.
SO WE HAVE STUDIED WE&apos;VE
ANALYZED ELIMINATING THE TURN
LANES IN ORDER TO PROVIDE
BUFFER BIKE LANES AND THAT IS
WHAT WE WANT OUR PROPOSAL.
SO FROM FIFTH TO DIVISION WE GO
WITH WE HAD A FIVE FOOT BIKE
LANE INCLUDING THE GUTTER.
WE GET TO BUMP THAT UP
INCLUDE
A BUFFER, A NARROW BUFFER,
REDUCE OUR TRAVEL LANES TO TEN
AND A HALF FEET AND THAT TAKES
US TO DIVISION.
THIS QUALIFIES AS AN ALL AGES
AND ABILITIES ROUTE FROM
DIVISION TO PACKARD WHERE WE
HAVE THE SHIRO&apos;S WHERE WE HAVE
A CENTER LEFT TURN LANE.
WE&apos;RE ELIMINATING THE CENTER
LEFT TURN LANE PUTTING IN TEN
AND A HALF FOOT TRAVEL LANES,
GETTING SIX AND A HALF FOOT
BIKE LANES WITH NARROW BUFFERS
TO QUALIFY AS ALL AGES AND TO
STATE AGAIN SHIRO&apos;S AND VERY
NARROW TRAVEL LANE WIDTHS THERE
IS ALSO A PARKING LANE KIND
OF OFF TO THE SIDE AND WHAT
WE&apos;VE PROPOSED IS CONVENTIONAL
BIKE LANES BUT THEY ARE THE BUT
THEY ARE NARROW.
&gt;&gt; WE WILL INSTALL THE SIX INCH
PAVEMENT MARKING AND THERE WILL
BE NO LEFT TURN LANES FROM
STATE TO CHURCH.
WE&apos;RE AGAIN ELIMINATING THE
LEFT TURN LANE AND SHIRO&apos;S SO
THAT WE CAN PUT IN BUFFORD BIKE
LANES THE ENTIRE WAY WE&apos;VE
REQUESTED ELIMINATION
OF METERED PARKING BETWEEN EAST
UNIVERSITY AND CHURCH SO THAT
WE CAN CONTINUE THE BUFFORD
BIKE LANES AND SO WE&apos;VE GOT THE
FOUR POINT THREE THREE FOOT
BIKE LANE A NARROW BUFFER TEN
AND A HALF FOOT LANES BETWEEN
STATE AND OAKLAND FROM OAKLAND
TO EU WE HAVE THIS ALSO OFFERS
BOLLER POTENTIAL THE REDUCED
TRAVEL LANES, BUFFORD BIKE
LANES, NARROW BUFFORD BIKE
LANES AND FROM E YOU TO CHURCH
WHERE WE HAVE THAT PARKING THEY
WILL HAVE LARGER BIKE LANES
WITH THE NARROW BUFFER WHICH
QUALIFIES AS ALL AGES
OF ABILITIES.
SO ALL IN ALL THE BIKE NETWORK
IMPROVEMENTS WE&apos;VE GONE FROM NO
BIKE LANES ON STATE STREET
NORTH OF HILL AND BETWEEN
HOOVER AND ARCH TO HAVING
CONSISTENT BIKE LANES ALL THE
WAY DOWN THE CORRIDOR AND THEN
SIMILARLY ON HILL WHERE WE&apos;VE
HAD SHIRO&apos;S WE&apos;VE NOW
CREATED BIKE LANES ALONG THE
ENTIRE CORRIDOR.
DOES ANYONE HAVE ANY QUESTIONS
?
THANK YOU.
THIS WAS REALLY HELPFUL.
I REALLY LIKE THESE CROSS
SECTIONS.
I FOUND THEM A LOT EASIER TO
INTERPRET THAN SOME OTHER ONES.
JUST GOING TO DROP THAT RIGHT
IN THERE IF YOU WOULDN&apos;T MIND
ON SHARING YOUR SCREEN SO IT&apos;S
EASIER TO SEE YOUR PEOPLE CAN
USE THE RIGHT HAND FUNCTION FOR
QUESTIONS
.
I HAVE ONE WHILE PEOPLE ARE
THINKING I WANT TO MAKE SURE I
UNDERSTAND CORRECTLY THAT IF WE
WANT PROTECTED BIKE LANES SO WE
HEARD FROM A LOT OF CALLERS
TODAY THAT PEOPLE REALLY
LOOKING FOR PROTECTED
CONTINUOUS PROTECTED BIKE LANE
ON STATE AND THE BARRIER TO
THAT IS THE PARKING IS THAT
RIGHT THAT WE BECAUSE WE CAN&apos;T
IF WE DO REMOVED SOME OF THAT
PARKING WE COULD GET PROTECTED
BIKE CONTINUOUSLY ON STATE LIKE
SOME OF THE DESIGNS THAT WE SAW
BEFORE.
&gt;&gt; IS THAT RIGHT?
I BELIEVE THAT WOULD ENABLE
THERE TO BE PROTECTED BIKE
LANES BECAUSE EVEN WITH THE YOU
CAN&apos;T HAVE THE INSTALLATION
OF BOLLARDS IF YOU&apos;RE GOING TO
HAVE A PARKING LANE RIGHT.
ALTHOUGH I I I WOULD RECOGNIZE
THE POTENTIAL TO PUT THE BIKE
LANE ALONG THE CURBSIDE IF YOU
HAD BOLLARDS BETWEEN THE
PARKING AND IN THE BIKE LANE
AND THEN THE BIKE LANE WAS
BETWEEN BOLLARDS AND CURB I
SUPPOSE THAT&apos;S A THAT&apos;S A
POSSIBILITY AS WELL.
BUT ONE OF THE CHALLENGES HAS
BEEN THIS NOT HAVING THE
MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT TO
CONSIDER INSTALLING BOLLARDS AT
THIS TIME.
OK, AND DO I FURTHER UNDERSTAND
CORRECTLY THAT THE DECISION TO
REMOVE PARKING LIES WITH THE
DENHA?
&gt;&gt; THAT IS CORRECT, YES.
SO FOR FOLKS WHO HAVE CONCERNS
ABOUT THE PROTECTION OF BIKE
LANES IN THE PARKING, IT SOUNDS
LIKE US THE PLACE TO ASK SOME
QUESTIONS.
I SEE LARRY.
&gt;&gt; I THINK I SEE YOUR HAND UP
YOUR MUTED
RAYMOND, DO YOU HAVE
A USING POWERS?
I CAN JUST ASK TO YOU OK
.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
IT LOOKS LIKE YOU&apos;RE ON MUTE.
&gt;&gt; WHAT WAS THAT?
&gt;&gt; LOOKS LIKE YOU&apos;RE UNMUTED
YOU LOOKED LIKE YOU HAD YOUR
HAND UP.
DO YOU HAVE A QUESTION OR
COMMENT?
&gt;&gt; OH NO.
NO, I THINK IT DIDN&apos;T GO DOWN
OK.
ALL FOR THE LAST TIME I PUT IT
ON RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; I DID THE MOTION OK, THANK
YOU.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
JULIA.
HI.
THANKS FOR THAT NICE
PRESENTATION.
THERE ARE A LOT OF SLIGHTLY
DIFFERENT CONFIGURATIONS AND I
WAS TRYING TO TRACK THE PATTERN
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE WIDTH
OF THE BIKE LANE AND THE WIDTH
THE BUFFER AND I THOUGHT I HAD
IT AND THEN THERE WAS A BIKE
LANE THAT WAS ABOUT SIX FEET
WIDE WITH A NARROW BUFFER AND
AND THEN I I LOST I WAS LIKE
NO, I WAS EXPECTING THE BIKE
LANE TO BE MORE LIKE FIVE FEET
WITH A FOOT AND A HALF BUFFER
AND I JUST WONDERED HOW YOU
MADE THOSE DECISIONS FOR THE
MOST PART WE DIDN&apos;T HAVE A LOT
OF ROOM LIKE THAT THRESHOLD
WHERE OH THE BIKE LANE SIX FEET
AND SO NOW WE CAN CONSIDER A
LARGER BUFFER.
WE HAVEN&apos;T MADE THOSE FINE
TUNED DECISIONS YET.
&gt;&gt; THE TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER
ON THE PROJECT HAS HAS BEEN ON
LEAVE AND SO NOW THAT SHE&apos;S
BACK WE&apos;RE GOING TO GET THAT
FINAL FINAL DETAILS WORKED OUT
SO THAT THAT IS A GOOD POINT.
&gt;&gt; THAT IS A RELATIVELY EASY
THING TO ADDRESS RIGHT THROUGH.
I MEAN THAT&apos;S THAT SHIFTING
OF THOSE LONG LINES AS WE CALL
THEM, THOSE KIND OF LONGITUDE.
&gt;&gt; THE LINES ARE PRETTY EASY TO
TO SHIFT AROUND AND THEN SOME
OF THE BIKE LANES WHEREAS NOW
AS I THINK FOUR FEET WITH THE
NARROWEST ONE WITHOUT TOO MUCH
OF A BUFFER.
I JUST WONDER WHAT THE
GUIDELINES ARE FOR THE WIDTH
OF BIKE LANES.
&gt;&gt; SO I UNDERSTAND THE
GUIDELINE WOULD BE THAT FOUR
BUT WIDE IS A MINIMAL SO
OF COURSE THE MORE THE MERRIER.
RIGHT.
WE WANT MORE FOR MORE
COMFORT BUT FOREFOOT IS A
MINIMUM AND FIVE FOOT IS
PREFERRED NOW THEY&apos;RE JUST
MINIMUM FOR WHAT IS THAT LIKE
FOR AN ALL AGES NETWORK OR
MINIMUM FOR WHAT THAT&apos;S GOING
TO BE A MINIMUM RAYMONDE IS
THAT ASSETTO YEAH I JUST
QUICKLY OPEN ACTO THAT DOOR
IDENTIFIES FOUR FEET SO THE
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CITY
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS WHICH
IS THE MORE CONTEMPORARY OVER
ASTILL I JUST QUICKLY LOOK THAT
UP AND KNOCKED OVER FOUR FEET
AS A MINIMUM.
THANK YOU PETE AND THEN BRETT
SO FOUR FOOT MINIMUM DOES THAT
DO THEY SPECIFY IF THAT SHOULD
INCLUDE THE GUTTER PANT OR NOT?
&gt;&gt; DO YOU HAVE THAT AVAILABLE
RAIMENT YOUR MUTED RAYMONDE
YEAH I HAVE TOO MANY WINDOWS
OPEN SO I&apos;M TRYING TO SCROLL
BACK AND FORTH SO UNDERBITE
GLASS IS A DESIRABLE BIKE WITH
ADJACENT TO A CURB FACING SIX
FEET THE DESIRABLE WRITABLE
SURFACE ADJACENT TO A STRAIGHT
EDGE OR LONGITUDINAL JOINT IS
FOUR FEET WITH A MINIMUM WITH
THE THREE FEET IN CITIES WHERE
ILLEGAL PARKING AND BIKE LANE
IS OF CONCERN FIVE FOOT WIDE
BIKE LANES MAY BE PREFERRED.
SO IT&apos;S KIND OF A CONTINUUM
OF DIFFERENT THINGS ABOUT IF
THERE&apos;S STANDING CURB
LONGITUDINAL JOINTS AND ILLEGAL
PARKING.
&gt;&gt; OK, ALSO I WANTED TO ASK
DENHA IS GOING TO MAKE YOUR
BEST DECISION MAKING AUTHORITY
OVER PURCHASING LIKE HAVE WE
ASKED THEM ABOUT GETTING RID
OF IT OR WHAT IS THE PROCESS TO
MAKE THAT RECOMMENDATION?
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE WE HAVE HAD
DISCUSSIONS ABOUT IT.
THERE ARE QUITE A LOT ALONG
THIS CORRIDOR AND SO
THAT GAVE
THEM PAUSE AS FAR AS EDA&apos;S
ENGINEER, YOU KNOW, IT NEVER
DID GO IN FRONT OF THEIR BOARD.
BUT AS FAR AS THE MAGNITUDE
OF THE AMOUNT OF THE PARKING,
IT WAS A LARGE ASK AND YOU
KNOW, OF COURSE WE POINTED OUT
THAT SOUTH OF HOOVER IT DOESN&apos;T
SEEM LIKE IT GETS USED UTILIZED
A LOT BUT THEY ALSO OFFERED
THAT HAVING THAT SPACE IS ALSO
FOR STOPPING DROP OFFS
TEMPORARY PARKING, LOADING,
UNLOADING SO SO THEY IT WAS
MORE MORE THAN JUST THE METER
USAGE THAT THEY WERE LOOKING AT
AND SO THEY WANTED TO LOOK AT
THE BIG PICTURE AND THE DEMAND
ON ON THAT PARKING AS IT
RELATES TO THE BICYCLE NETWORK.
SO IT WAS CONSIDERED THAT IF IF
WE COULD MOVE MORE TOWARDS AN
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES NETWORK
THAT WOULD GIVE THEM MORE
REASON TO REDUCE OR ELIMINATE
THE PARKING.
&gt;&gt; BUT WITH THE SCOPE OF THIS
PROJECT WE HAD DIFFICULTY
MAKING THAT HAPPEN AT THIS TIME
.
OK, AND THAT&apos;S NOT YOU&apos;RE
SAYING THAT THERE ARE OTHER
INHIBITERS OTHER THAN THE
PARKING THAT ARE PREVENTING
WE&apos;RE GOING TO ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES BECAUSE WELL SO AS
WE&apos;VE AS WE TOUCHED TOUCHED ON
IN JUNE AND AS IT WAS BROUGHT
UP EARLIER TONIGHT, THE TREE
LINE TRAIL HAS A PORTION HERE
AND WE&apos;VE CITY STAFF LOOKED AT
THAT INCORPORATING IT INTO THIS
PROJECT.
BUT THIS WAS SUCH A SHORT
SEGMENT SO THEN WE EVEN TRIED
TO EVALUATE EVALUATE WHAT WOULD
TAKE HOW HOW FAR WOULD WE HAVE
TO CHASE THIS TO A CYCLE TRACK
IN ORDER TO MAKE IT HAPPEN?
HOW MUCH HOW MANY FUNDS WOULD
WE HAVE TO COME UP WITH?
AND IT BECAME CLEAR PRETTY
QUICKLY THAT THIS REALLY NEEDED
TO BE STUDIED.
THIS THIS REALLY NEEDED TO BE
LOOKED AT THE BIG PICTURE
OF THE BICYCLE NETWORK AND
WHETHER IT&apos;S TWO WAY CYCLE
TRACKS OR ITS SEPARATED, YOU
KNOW, IN IT IN DIRECTION BIKE
LANE THERE THERE WERE THERE WAS
A LOT GOING ON BEYOND THE SCOPE
OF THIS PROJECT AND THIS
PROJECT HEADED A TIGHT TIMELINE
.
SO IT WAS BASED ON DISCUSSIONS
WITH THE D.A. AND HOW THEY
WANTED YOU KNOW, THEY WANTED
MORE OF THE ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES PART OF THE NETWORK
THAT WE COULDN&apos;T DELIVER ON
THIS TIMELINE.
SO SO BASED ON THE SO THEY
WEREN&apos;T WILLING TO REMOVE THE
PARKING WITHOUT A COMMITMENT TO
A LARGER SEGMENT OF ALL AGES
AND ABILITIES NETWORK.
IS THAT IS THAT CORRECT?
WELL, WE COULDN&apos;T WE COULDN&apos;T
GET THE BOLLARDS IN BECAUSE
OF THE MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT
AND THAT REALLY WOULD HAVE BEEN
THE THE SIMPLEST SOLUTION THE
NEXT STEP WAS CONSIDERING THE
TWO WAY CYCLE TRACK BUT THE TWO
WAY CYCLE TRACK WAS SO
DISJOINTED AND SO WE JUST KEPT
RUNNING INTO WELL WE CAN&apos;T DO
THIS BECAUSE OF THAT.
WE CAN&apos;T DO THIS BECAUSE
OF THAT THAT IT&apos;S IT&apos;S A LARGER
BIGGER PICTURE TO BE LOOKED AT
RIGHT.
I MEAN TO ME THE PARTLY THE
BIGGER PICTURE IS WHAT JONATHAN
LEVINE MENTIONED IN PUBLIC
COMMENT WHICH IS LIKE WE&apos;VE
WE&apos;VE MADE THE WE&apos;VE REASONED
THE SOUTH STATE AND EISENHOWER
AREA TO BE A TRANSIT ORIENTED
ZONING.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M CURIOUS HOW ADJUSTABLE
IS THIS PLAN SO IF WHEN WE GET
THE MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT, CAN
WE THEN REMOVE PARKING AND
RESTRIKE LIKE IS THAT HOW LONG
ARE WE STUCK WITH THIS VERSION
IS MY EVEN EVEN THE D.A.
RECOGNIZED THAT THIS WAS SORT
OF A TEMPORARY SOLUTION, THAT
THIS WAS MOVING IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION.
BUT THIS ISN&apos;T THE FINAL
ANSWER.
WE&apos;RE NOT STUCK WITH IT.
IT IS A MATTER OF PAVEMENT
MARKINGS.
WE&apos;RE NOT PUTTING IN ANYTHING
PERMANENT THAT WOULD KEEP US
FROM MAKING AT ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES WITH WITH VOLLERS
PAINT.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
AND WE HEARD DEVELOPING AN
INTERNAL LIST OF ALL THE BIKE
LANES WE WOULD RETROFIT INTO A
YOU KNOW THAT HAVE BUFFERS THAT
WE CAN PUT IN VERTICAL
DELINEATOR OR YOU MAY HAVE
HEARD RYAN ALLUDE TO THAT
THERE&apos;S THIS NEW TYPE
OF DELINEATOR CALLED A WAVE
DELINEATOR THAT THEY&apos;RE
PILOTING IN CHELSEA INTO THE
LEAGUE OF AMERICAN BICYCLISTS.
WE ARE LOOKING TO THOSE AS WELL
TO SEE IF THEY HAVE SOME
APPLICABILITY.
WHAT&apos;S NICE ABOUT THEM IS
THEY&apos;RE VERY NARROW.
THEY&apos;RE ONLY A COUPLE INCHES
WIDE SO YOU DON&apos;T NEED A BIG
HEAVY BASE.
SO THIS WOULD BE LIKE TOP
OF OUR LIST, RIGHT?
BECAUSE WE KNOW IT&apos;S A HEAVILY
TRAVELED CORRIDOR BOTH FOR ALL
MODES OF TRANSPORTATION.
SO WE WOULD THIS WOULD PROBABLY
BE ONE OF THE FIRST FACILITIES
WE WOULD LOOK TO PUT IN SOME
DELINEATOR IS BOLLARDS TO
UPGRADE IT FROM BUFFORD BIKE
LANES ARE A PROTECTED BIKE
LANES.
&gt;&gt; ONCE WE SAW THAT MAINTENANCE
EQUIPMENT.
THANKS.
ALL RIGHT, BRETT.
AND THEN FOR US I THINK YOU SAY
THAT I APPRECIATE HOW YOU WERE
ABLE TO WORK IN A BUFFORD BIKE
LANE BETWEEN ARCH AND HOOVER
AND STILL MAINTAIN THE LEFT
TURN.
THAT WAS THAT WAS A TRICKY
THING.
JUST A COUPLE QUICK CLARIFYING
QUESTIONS SO I AND STATE
BETWEEN PACKARD AND HILL YOU
GUYS REMOVING THE LEFT TURN
LANE IT LOOKED LIKE THAT WAS
THE CASE AND ONE DRAWING BUT
ANOTHER DRAWING MAYBE BECAUSE
THINGS ARE TURNED AROUND.
I THOUGHT I SAW A LEFT TURN
LANE IN THERE STILL BUT AND
THEN SECONDLY WITH THE YOU
KNOW, AS NARROW AS FOUR FOOT
BIKE LANE, I JUST WANT TO MAKE
SURE WHATEVER EQUIPMENT WE&apos;RE
LOOKING AT OR CONSIDERING FOR
MAINTENANCE WOULD BE ABLE TO
HANDLE NARROWER THAN FIVE FOOT
DOWN TO FOUR FOOT WIDTH.
I JUST DON&apos;T WANT TO YOU BUY
SOMETHING ASSUMING FIVE FOOT
WIDTH BIKE LANES AND YOU
WOULDN&apos;T BE ABLE TO USE IT ON A
FOUR FOOT BIKE LANE AND THEN NO
.
RIGHT.
SO BETWEEN PACKARD AND HILL ON
STATE STREET THERE WILL STILL
BE THE LEFT TURN LANE.
THAT MOVEMENT IS HEAVILY
TRAVELED TO HEAD SOUTH EAST IN
THE CITY FROM STATE STREET AS
WELL AS NORTHWEST WHEN YOU GO
NORTH.
SO THAT IS NOT BEING ELIMINATED
AND THEN OK, BUT THERE&apos;S STILL
ROOM FOR BUFFER BIKE LANES.
I&apos;M OK TO LOOK AT THE CROSS
SECTION TOGETHER.
OK?
YEAH IN IN ONE PART OF IT WE&apos;VE
GOT PARKING AND IN ANOTHER PART
THAT WE&apos;VE GOT THE CENTER TURN
LANE SO THAT&apos;S THE THAT THAT&apos;S
HOW THEY WORK TOGETHER WITH THE
VIRTUALLY THE SAME AMOUNT
OF SPACE SO SO THAT&apos;S THE
SOUTHBOUND LEFT.
THEY&apos;RE ALSO BEING NORTHBOUND
THERE WAS NOT IN NORTH
CAROLINA.
&gt;&gt; YEAH I GUESS RIGHT NOW IT&apos;S
KIND OF LAND AND A HALF IT&apos;S
JUST A BIG WIDE THING.
THAT&apos;S WHAT I&apos;M THINKING OF .
OK SO THERE ISN&apos;T ONE DOWN
THERE WILL NOT BE OK THANK YOU
.
AS FAR AS THE MAINTENANCE
EQUIPMENT BEING ABLE TO
MAINTAIN A FOUR FOOT BIKE LANE
THAT I AM UNSURE OF .
YEAH I MEAN TO BUILD THAT POINT
TO RECITE IT IS SOMETHING WE
ARE LOOKING AT THE ACTUAL
DIMENSIONS, HOW NARROW WE CAN
GO.
WHAT WE&apos;RE TRYING TO DO IS
TARGET FIVE BECAUSE WE KNOW THE
PIECE OF MOST MOST OF THE PIECE
OF EQUIPMENT A FIVE FOOT THERE
ARE SOME PIECES THAT CAN GO
DOWN TO AS LITTLE AS FOUR FEET.
SO I THINK IT JUST DEPENDS ON
WHERE WE LAND AND THEN MAKING
SURE THAT WE&apos;RE HAVING
FACILITIES THAT ARE COMPATIBLE
WITH THAT PIECE OF EQUIPMENT.
SO IT IS DEFINITELY ON OUR
RADAR TO MAKE SURE THAT WE&apos;RE
DESIGNING FACILITIES THAT CAN
BE MAINTAINED.
OK, THANK YOU.
GREAT.
FIRST OK WELL THANKS FOR THE
PRESENTATION.
I DO NOTICE THE TRAVELLIN
CHANGED TO TEN AND A HALF FOOT
WIDE.
THANK YOU FOR CONSIDERING BUS
OPERATIONS ALONG THIS CORRIDOR.
AS YOU ALL KNOW NOW THE BUSSES
RUNNING LIKE WE MENTIONED THE
THE THEY SUPPORTED ALISON.
HOWEVER, IN ORDER TO MAKE THOSE
CONNECTIONS YOU NEED A BUS TO
CONNECT THEM.
I&apos;M PRETTY SURE YOU HEARD A LOT
OF COMMENTS FROM THE UNIVERSITY
SYSTEM AS WELL.
I HAVE TO SAY, YOU KNOW, NOT
EVERYBODY KNOW A BUS IS CAN
BETWEEN TEN AND TEN TEN TEN AND
A HALF FOOT WIDE.
SO THAT ALONE.
RIGHT.
YOU&apos;VE GOT A TWO WAY TRAFFIC
BUS TRAFFIC ALONG THAT
CORRIDOR.
SO EVEN THE ARRIVAL RIGHT NOW
THEY OPERATE ABOUT IT I WOULD
SAY ABOUT TEN BUSSES AN HOUR
WHICH MEANS EVERY FIVE, SIX
MINUTES THERE IS A BUS GOING BY
SO TEN AND A HALF OK IS THE I
WOULD SAY MINIMUM I WOULD SAY
PAPABILE IT WOULD BE LIKE
ELEVEN.
I KNOW THERE IS NOT A LOT
OF SPACE TO ACCOMMODATE
EVERYBODY SO THANK YOU FOR
CONSIDERING THAT FOR BALANCING
EVERY TRANSPORTATION.
MOSLEY THERE SAY I WANT TO
MENTION YOU KNOW LIKE I SAID
THERE ARE MORE THAN TEN BUSSES
JUST BY THE RIGHT UNIVERSITY
HAS A LOT MORE BUSSES OPERATE
ALONG THAT CORRIDOR SO I LOOK
AT SOME NUMBERS I THINK I
LEARNED THAT SEGMENT OF STATE
STREET WE GOT QUITE A FEW BUS
STOPS BEFORE THE BUS STOP.
I THINK IT WILL MAKE BUS
OPERATIONS EASIER IF IT&apos;S A
PROTECTED YOU CAN TELL YOU KNOW
YOU HAVE TO DESIGN CUT OFF AND
MOVE INTO A BIKE LANE WHICH WE
DON&apos;T WANT TO SEE IF IT&apos;S A
PROTECTED BIKE LANES SO BUSSES
WILL HAVE TO STOP I MEAN
LOADING CUSTOMERS ON THE BIKE
ON THE PROTECTIVE BIKE WHICH
BASICALLY CREATED SOME
CONFLICTS BETWEEN PEDESTRIAN
FOOT TRAFFIC AND THE CYCLIST I
WOULD SAY POTENTIALLY INTRODUCE
SOME SAFETY CONCERNS.
OF COURSE THERE IS A WAY TO
WORK AROUND IT WITH PROPER
SIGNAGE OR PROPERTIES.
I LIKE IT.
WE WE ALREADY HAVE A COUPLE
OF EXAMPLES WE WORK WITH CITY
AND DENHA BUT I PERSONALLY I
STILL HEAR A LOT OF CONCERNS
FROM OUR OPERATORS BECAUSE THEY
ARE LOADING LIKE WHEELCHAIR
USERS SO THEY BASICALLY JUST
AND THE CUSTOMER INTO A BIKE
LANE AND WITHOUT ANNOYING THERE
MIGHT BE A CYCLIST COMING BY SO
ANYWAYS I JUST WANT TO BRING
THAT TO EVERYBODY&apos;S ATTENTION
WHEN WE DESIGNED THOSE LANES WE
NEED TO, YOU KNOW, BE
CONSIDERATE OF THE BUS RIDERS,
OTHER ROADWAY USERS OF COURSE I
KNOW THERE IS I&apos;M PERSONALLY
I&apos;M A CYCLIST SO I FULLY
STRONGLY SUPPORT TO HAVE A
COMPREHENSIVE CONNECTED BIKE
LANE EVERYWHERE I BIKE
EVERYWHERE WHENEVER ARE OK BUT
I COULDN&apos;T BIKE THIS WEEK YOU
KNOW WHAT?
BUT THAT&apos;S WHY I&apos;M SAYING BIKE
LANE IS SO IMPORTANT BUT IS IT
WORKS REALLY WELL FOR SHORT
DISTANCE BUT THE BUS IS ALSO
FOR A LONGER DISTANCE AND ARE
ALL WEATHER CONDITIONS AND
ESPECIALLY WHEN USED IF YOU
REMEMBER THE VISION ZERO PLAN
IN TALKING ABOUT THIS EIGHTY
MORE THAN EIGHTY THOUSAND
COMMUTERS COMING FROM OUTSIDE
THE CITY BOUNDARY AND MOST
OF THEM CANNOT BIKE HERE SO WE
HAVE TO PROVIDE THEM OTHER I
MEAN SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORTATION
MODE WHICH MOST LIKELY WILL BE
BUS OR EXPRESS BUS.
SO WE DO HAVE A PLAN.
I MEAN THE RIDE HAS A LONG TERM
PLAN ENVISIONING STATE STREET
AS A FUTURE BUS RAPID TRANSIT
OR KEY PRIORITY CORRIDOR WHICH
WILL REQUIRE OTHER DEDICATED
BUS LINES OR MAYBE TRANSIT
TAKING A PRIORITY OR OTHER
PRIORITY MATTER IS JUST MAKING
SURE WE ARE SAFE OPERATIONS
HIGH HIGHER SPEED OPERATIONS
COMPARED TO OTHER TRAFFIC AND
THEN THAT&apos;S HOW YOU ATTRACT
MORE PEOPLE ON BUSSES AND TO
ACHIEVE THAT MOST MOTION TARGET
A LINE IN THE IN THE USER AND
THE VISIONS ARE PLANS.
SO I TOTALLY SUPPORT WE NEED TO
SHARE THE STREET SPACE
CONSIDERING ALL THE MODES
ESPECIALLY NOW MOTORIZED EVEN
THE BUS IS A MOTORIZED I STILL
CONSIDER AS MUCH AS SAFER
BETTER WAY TO TO TRAVEL YOU
WITHIN A CITY BOUNDARY OR
OUTSIDE THE BOUNDARY.
WE NEED TO RELY ON THEM TO
CARRY A LARGE NUMBER PEOPLE
INTO THE DOWNTOWN AREA AND THE
UNIVERSITY AS WELL.
SO THANK YOU FOR LISTENING AND
THANK YOU FOR CONSIDERING ALL
THOSE COMMENTS.
BUT I DO WANT TO BRING YOUR
ATTENTION WITH SOME
CONSIDERATION IS GOING FORWARD
WHEN WE PLAN FOR BIKE LANES,
OTHER FACILITIES.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, ERIKA.
&gt;&gt; THANKS AND THANKS MR. YANG
FOR BRINGING THAT UP.
I THINK THAT IS SORT OF A
MISSING PIECE IN THIS DESIGN IS
HOW WHAT IS THE INTEGRATION
BETWEEN TRANSIT AND AND AND
CYCLING?
WHAT ARE THOSE WHAT DOES THAT
LOOK LIKE ALONG THE QUARTER
WHEN THERE IS A TRANSIT STOP?
HOW IS THE BUS CAN&apos;T APPROACH
GOGIA DIRECTLY AGAINST THE
CURB.
HOW IS THAT WHAT DOES THAT LOOK
LIKE FOR UNLOADING A WHEELCHAIR
INDIVIDUAL IN A WHEELCHAIR OR
YOU KNOW AND SO I GUESS THAT
WOULD BE SOMETHING TO I HOPE
THAT AS WE GET FURTHER INTO THE
DESIGN IT IS EXPLICITLY
INCORPORATED AND ACCOMMODATIONS
MADE.
IT&apos;S STILL NOT I GUESS A COUPLE
OF CLARIFYING POINTS.
I&apos;M ASSUMING THAT WILL ONE
THANK YOU FOR THE PRESENTATION.
IT&apos;S GOOD.
IT&apos;S GREAT TO SEE YOU SEE HOW
THIS IS GOING BUT I DIDN&apos;T SEE
WAS I MISSING SORT OF THE THE
LINK TO THESE SLIDES IN OUR IN
OUR PACKETS WERE THEY AVAILABLE
ON REGISTAR OR WILL THEY BE PUT
ON THERE SOON?
&gt;&gt; WE THE PRESENTATION WASN&apos;T
READY BY THE TIME I&apos;VE JUST
WANTED TO I WASN&apos;T MISSING IT
BECAUSE WE&apos;VE GOTTEN SOME
DETAILED COMMENTS ON THINGS.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE I
WASN&apos;T MISSING.
&gt;&gt; YEAH WE&apos;LL UPLOAD IT AS THE
SAME SAME THING WITH THE LAST
PRESENTATION YOU FROM
BREITENBACH AS SOON AS WE GET
THOSE WELL I&apos;LL HAVE TO START
OK SO THE TRAFFIC VOLUMES HERE
ARE I ASSUME OVER TEN THOUSAND
VEHICLES ADT RIGHT.
IS THAT IS THAT TRUE BOTH ON
DAYTON AND HILL SO ON STATE S
OF PACARD IT IS GREATER THAN
TEN THOUSAND.
I&apos;M NOT SURE THAT HILL STREET
HAS A VOLUME OF GREATER THAN
TEN THOUSAND.
&gt;&gt; I GUESS IT WOULD BE GOOD TO
KNOW WHAT THOSE VOLUMES ARE IF
THAT COULD BE SOME JUST LISTED
SOMEPLACE.
I MEAN I THINK THAT&apos;S A KEY
POINT IN TERMS OF HOW THESE
FACILITIES ULTIMATELY NEED TO
LOOK IN TERMS OF THE PROTECTED
COMPONENTS AND IT&apos;S NOT CLEAR
TO ME BECAUSE I THINK THERE&apos;S
BEEN FAIRLY DELICATE IN TERMS
OF WORDING AND DISCUSSING
PARTNERSHIPS AND FEEDBACK FROM
DIFFERENT AGENCIES.
IT&apos;S STILL NOT CLEAR TO ME
EXACTLY IN EACH INSTANCE WHY
THE D.A. HAS MAINTAINED PARKING
AND I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THE CAR
MANAGEMENT STUDY THAT THEY&apos;RE
CONDUCTING RIGHT NOW IS GOING
TO HELP INFORM THAT.
I CAN UNDERSTAND THAT THERE&apos;S A
VARIETY OF DIFFERENT NEEDS
ACROSS THE DOWNTOWN FOR FOR
DIFFERENT SPACES.
BUT THIS IS OBVIOUSLY A KEY
SORT OF TRANSPORTATION PRIORITY
AND SO WHERE WERE UNABLE TO
ACHIEVE A PROTECTED BICYCLE
LANE THAT&apos;S CLEARLY WHAT WE OUR
PLANS SAY AND ALSO AN ACTIVE
GUIDANCE SUGGEST IS REQUIRED
HERE THAT SEEMS PROBLEMATIC.
AND SO I GUESS I WOULD LIKE TO
HAVE BETTER GUIDANCE ON, YOU
KNOW, WHY THAT PARKING IS BEING
MAINTAINED AND ALSO IT&apos;S IT&apos;S
ALSO NOT CLEAR TO ME EXACTLY
WHY WE MOVED AWAY FROM THE TO
THE TO CYCLE TRACK.
I KNOW THERE&apos;S IT BECOMES
CLUNKY ALONG THE WAYS BUT WHAT
ARE THE ARE WE TALKING ABOUT
ARE THE BARRIERS THAT THERE&apos;S
NOT ENOUGH SPACE ALONG THE
WHOLE CORRIDOR OR IS IT THAT WE
HAVE THESE DIFFERENT NEEDS FOR
PARKING IN SOME SECTIONS AND
NOT PARKING OTHERS?
I MEAN I&apos;M JUST I&apos;M NOT IT&apos;S
NOT CLEAR TO ME WHY THAT&apos;S AN
ABANDONED IF OR IF IT IF IT&apos;S
MULTIPLE REASONS.
IS IT ONE BARRIER IS IT CAN SO
I&apos;M JUST LOOKING WE&apos;RE
OBVIOUSLY GETTING A LOT
OF FEEDBACK HERE THAT WE WANT
TO SEE A REALLY STRONG
PROTECTED FACILITY ALONG THIS
CORRIDOR AND IT&apos;S REALLY
IMPORTANT FOR OUR LONG TERM
TRANSPORTATION GOALS HERE.
JUST REAL QUICKLY TO ANSWER
YOUR FIRST QUESTION, IT LOOKS
LIKE BOTH HILL AND STATE ARE
OVER TEN THOUSAND BASED ON SOME
TRAFFIC COME BUT I JUST QUICKLY
ACCESS OK AS FAR AS THE TWO WAY
CYCLE TRACK SO SOME OF SOME
OF THE INFORMATION I&apos;VE
GATHERED FROM TRANSPORTATION
ENGINEERS IS THAT TO CYCLE
TRACKS MAKE A LOT OF SENSE OR
AT LEAST MAKE MORE SENSE IN THE
DOWNTOWN AREA WHERE THERE IS
JUST A I GUESS A DIFFERENT
USAGE AND A DIFFERENT SPEED IN
THE DOWNTOWN AREA.
SO THEN YOU GET TO STATE SOUTH
OF HOOVER AND
WE&apos;VE GOT
DRIVEWAY CONFLICTS AND WE&apos;VE
GOT JUST A DIFFERENT FEEL.
MY UNDERSTANDING ABOUT THE TWO
WAY CYCLE TRACK THAT IS
PROPOSED AS PART OF THE TREE
LINE TRAIL IS MORE OF A
RECREATION FACILITY AND NOT AS
MUCH OF A COMMUTER FACILITY.
&gt;&gt; NOW CAN IT DOUBLE I IMAGINE
IT WOULD IF WE COULD MAKE THAT
FUNCTIONAL.
&gt;&gt; SO YES, THAT PART OF IT WAS
THE KOOKINESS I MEAN WE HAD
CONSIDERED TAKING A TWO WAY
CYCLE TRACK FROM THE SOUTH END
OF THIS PROJECT GRANGER OR EVEN
PAINT AND POSTED ALL THE WAY
DOWN TO STIMPSON AND THEN TAKE
IT ALL THE WAY TO SAORVIEW AND
WHAT WOULD THAT LOOK LIKE?
WELL, SOMETHING WE TALKED ABOUT
IS THAT SOUTH OF HOOVER IT
WOULD BE BETTER IF IT WAS ON
THE WEST SIDE OF THE STREET AND
NORTH OF HILL.
IT WOULD BE BETTER IF IT WAS ON
THE EAST SIDE OF THE STREET.
SO THERE WERE DEFINITE
LOGISTICS THAT GOT IN THE WAY
AND THEN THE THE BUDGET AND THE
THE STUDYING AND THE
CONNECTIVITY.
&gt;&gt; AND SO YES, THERE WERE JUST
A LOT OF COMPLICATIONS TO IT.
&gt;&gt; I KNOW THAT THE THE TENDS TO
LOOK AT THE BECAUSE IT CAN BE A
VERY EFFICIENT USE OF SPACE BUT
WE RAN INTO A LOT OF ISSUES
WITH IT IN ORDER TO MAKE IT
WORK WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THIS
PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; AND IF I CAN ADD MAYBE TWO
EXTRA THOUGHTS ON THAT AND SO
YOU CAN CORRECT ME IF I&apos;M WRONG
I THINK WHEN WE WERE INITIALLY
VETTING THE IDEA THAT TO A
CYCLE TRACK EARLY IN THE
PROCESS WE HAD HEARD SOME
CONCERN FROM SOME OF THE
NEIGHBORHOODS ON THE EAST SIDE
OF STATE THAT WERE CONCERNED
OVER THE CROSSOVERS THAT YOU&apos;D
HAVE TO CROSS OVER STATE TO GET
TO THE CYCLE TRACK.
THERE WASN&apos;T A VERY GOOD
TERMINUS ESPECIALLY ON THE
SOUTH END BECAUSE WHERE YOU END
THAT GRANGER WHEN WE LOOKED AT
IT ORIGINALLY MEMORY SERVES ME
CORRECTLY TERESA KNOW GRANGERS
NOT SIGNALIZED SO HOW YOU
TRANSITION PEOPLE OUT OF A TWO
WAY CYCLE TRACK AT A
UNCONTROLLED INTERSECTION TO
TRANSITION OVER TO THE EXISTING
BIKE LANES GOT REALLY HAIRY.
WE DIDN&apos;T KNOW HOW TO MAKE THAT
MOVEMENT SAFELY AND BECAUSE
OF ALL THE VOLUMES AND JUST
COMPETING INTEREST ON THIS
CORRIDOR WE RAN INTO THAT
PROBLEM ANYWHERE WE WERE TRYING
TO MAKE THAT TRANSITION BECAUSE
WHEN YOU GO FROM A TO A CYCLE
TRACK AND THEN TRANSITION OVER
TO THE EXISTING BIKE LANES THAT
ARE CURBSIDE ONE DIRECTION ON
EACH SIDE, IT MAKES THAT
MOVEMENT VERY DIFFICULT AND
POSSIBLY DANGEROUS FOR THE
CYCLISTS AND SO FOR WHERE WE&apos;RE
AT IN THE PROCESS NOW KIND
OF AS TERESA SAID, THIS DOESN&apos;T
NECESSARILY SET IN STONE FOR
ETERNITY.
WE FELT LIKE THE BIKE LANES
CURBSIDE SINGLE DIRECTION HAD A
MUCH BETTER TIE IN TO THE
EXISTING FACILITIES TO THE
NORTH AND TO THE SOUTH AND THAT
IF IN THE FUTURE WE CAN REVISIT
THE IDEA OF REMOVAL OF PARKING
IN FAVOR OF A CYCLE TRACK OR
RUNNING A CYCLE TRACK FURTHER
TO THE NORTH OR TO THE SOUTH AS
HAS BEEN SUGGESTED BY EVEN SOME
OF OUR CALLERS DURING PUBLIC
COMMENT, I THINK THOSE
OPPORTUNITIES ARE STILL
AFFORDED TO US BUT WITHIN THE
PARAMETERS OF , YOU KNOW,
TERESA&apos;S PROJECT WE JUST
COULDN&apos;T FIND A WAY TO MAKE IT
WORK.
WE COULD FIT IT IN IN A WAY
THAT FELT SAFE AND COMFORTABLE
FROM THE USER EXPERIENCE.
SO IT WE LOOKED TOO HARD.
YOU KNOW, WE WE WE SPENT A LOT
OF HOURS AND ME PROBABLY WAY
LESS THAN OTHER PEOPLE EVEN ON
THIS CALL BUT WE JUST WE CANNOT
GIVE US THE HEEBIE JEEBIES
TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
MAKE THAT CYCLE TRACKWORK
THINKS THAT THAT HELPS AND I I
AND I THINK THAT IT&apos;S PRETTY
CRITICAL THAT WE END UP WITH
PROTECTED BIKE LANES AT THE END
OF THIS.
SO AND IN ALL SEGMENTS IN THAT
I THINK WE NEED I WOULD BE
INTERESTED IN UNDERSTANDING
BETTER HAVING BETTER GUIDANCE
FROM GDA AROUND EACH AREAS
WHERE THEY&apos;RE SUGGESTING
PARKING NEEDS TO BE MAINTAINED.
WHY IS THAT WHY IS THAT A MORE
CRITICAL ELEMENT OF OUR OF OUR
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK?
WHAT WHAT PROBLEM IS IT SOLVING
AND HOW DOES THAT FIT IN WITH
THE BIG PICTURE?
THANKS.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M NOT SEEING ANY OTHER
HANDS SO I THINK WE CAN WRAP
THIS UP.
THANKS SO MUCH, DREW.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS WAS REALLY HELPFUL.
YEAH OK, KEEP MOVING.
NEXT UP, WE HAVE STAFF REPORT
AND UPDATES WITH IT.
&gt;&gt; MOLLY, I KNOW WE&apos;RE REALLY
LATE.
DO WE JUST WANT TO DO ONE
MINUTE VERSION OR THE VERY,
VERY SHORTEST VERSION
OF EVERYTHING?
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
VERY GOOD.
THANK YOU.
SO CHURCH THE UPDATE HERE IS
THAT BIDS ARE EXPECTED TO BE
OPEN IN DECEMBER OR JANUARY
SIDEWALK GAPS ELSWORTH IS UNDER
CONSTRUCTION.
RUSSELL IS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
TBINGEN AND WENTZEL BRATMAN
TREES ARE COMPLETE.
YOU JUST HEARD ABOUT STATE
STREET BERTEN DRIVE BIKE LANES
ARE EXPECTED TO BE INSTALLED
THIS MONTH BUT WITH THE WEATHER
BEING KIND OF GOOFY, I DON&apos;T
KNOW IF THAT ONE ACTUALLY GOT
INSTALLED OR NOT BUT I KNOW THE
OFFICE BARTON BIKE LANES AND
HOPEFULLY VERY SOON.
YES, BROADWAY STREET PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT WAS HELD ON THE
TWENTY EIGHTH IN THE MEETING
SUMMARY IS POSTED ONLINE HERE
ON PARKWAY TO BEGIN RESURFACING
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE GATTI&apos;S
AVENUE RESURFACING HAS BEEN
POSTPONED THE SPRING OF TWENTY
TWENTY THREE AREHART DO PAY
ATTENTION TO THIS ONE THERE IS
THE PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT TOMORROW
AT SIX P.M. IT&apos;S VIRTUAL.
YOU CAN GO ON TO THE WEBSITE
WHICH IS EIGHT YOU GET TOGETHER
TWENTY TWENTY THREE IF YOU WISH
TO PARTICIPATE IN THAT.
WE ARE REVISITING SOME OF THE
ROAD THAT CONCEPTS WERE
PROPOSED SEVERAL YEARS AGO.
WE HAD A LOT OF DISCUSSION
SEVENTH 17 GREENVIEW SO I&apos;LL
SKIP OVER THAT BROOK STREET
THERE WAS A PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
HELD ON SEPTEMBER TWENTY SECOND
AND A VIDEO RECORDING IS
AVAILABLE ONLINE STATE AND
HILL.
&gt;&gt; WE JUST TALKED A LOT ABOUT
THAT UM LET&apos;S SEE HERE ON
PARKWAY ERHARD&apos;S EDGE LINES
WILL BE ADDED ON THE PARKWAY TO
NARROW THE TRAVELING SLIGHTLY
AND BUFFERED BIKE LANES WILL BE
INSTALLED ON GLAZIER WAY STREET
LIGHTS UPDATES JUST SHOW HOW
MANY NUMBER OF OUTAGES HAVE
BEEN ADDRESSED.
TRAFFIC CALMING GRANGER FROM
STATE TO PACARD HAS KICKED OFF
IN THE INITIAL QUESTIONNAIRE.
IT&apos;S DUE BACK ON THE TWENTY
FOURTH WHICH IS NEXT WEEK
TRANSPORTATION PLAN UPDATE.
WE ARE CURRENTLY OUT DOING
PUBLIC WORKSHOPS FOR THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM SO WE WERE
OUT AT A VERY CHILLY FARMER&apos;S
MARKET TODAY FROM 11:00 TO TO
WILL BE AT THE TRAILER WOOD
BRANCH LIBRARY THE SATURDAY
FROM TEN TO AND THEN THE
MARLETTE&apos;S CREEK BRANCH LIBRARY
I THINK IT&apos;S NEXT WEDNESDAY THE
TWENTY SIXTH FROM FORTY SIX AND
THEN I&apos;LL SKIP OVER THE RIGHT
UPDATE SINCE I SEE FOREST IS
STILL WITH US WE MIGHT BE ABLE
TO SPEAK TO SOME OF THOSE ITEMS
UNDER THE LIAISON REPORTS.
THANK YOU.
HELEN IS HERE TO ASK US HOW
LONG WE&apos;RE GOING TO BE MEETING.
WE&apos;RE ALMOST DONE.
NEXT UP IS LIAISON REPORTS AND
UPDATES AND COMMISSIONERS WHO
SPECIFICALLY SERVE AS A LIAISON
TO THE ORGANIZATION ARE INVITED
TO PROVIDE BRIEF REPORTS AND
UPDATES
NOT SEEING ANY WHICH IS
I THINK THAT&apos;S OK UNLESS
OF COURSE DID YOU HAVE ANYTHING
FOR YOU?
&gt;&gt; SURE.
I&apos;M NOT GOING TO TOUCH TOO MUCH
ON THE WEATHER REPORT INCLUDED
IN YOUR PACKET AND THIS IS
MAYBE A KIND OF A UH FOR NEXT
MEETING.
BUT I JUST WANT TO BRING TO
YOUR ATTENTION SO THE RIGHT IS
PLANNING TO COME AND JOIN THIS
NEXT MONTH&apos;S MEETING FOR FOR
DISCUSSION WITH THEIR
PROPULSION STUDY WHICH IS A
ZERO EMISSION BUSSES.
SO THIS STUDY I BELIEVE THE
DRAFT REPORT IS GOING TO BE UP
ON THE WEBSITE MAYBE TOMORROW
SO I CAN CERTAINLY SHARE THE
LINK.
I THERE IS GOING TO BE A VIDEO
TALKING ABOUT THE REPORT AS
WELL.
SO IF YOU COULD PRE READ THE
REPORT OR PREPARE SOME
QUESTIONS BEFORE NEXT MEETING
WITH OR APPRECIATE THAT.
SO I&apos;M WORKING WITH THE WOMEN
AND CHRIS TO ADD ON THE AGENDA
FOR NEXT MONTH&apos;S THANK YOU.
OK, THANK YOU.
OTHERLY ON REPORTS.
ALL RIGHT.
MOVING RIGHT ALONG TO
COMMISSIONER COMMUNICATIONS
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL
COMMISSIONERS TO PROVIDE
REPORTS AND UPDATES
.
ALL RIGHT.
CALL FOR AGENDA ITEMS.
I WILL JUST SAY IF YOU HAVE
ANYTHING TO ADD TO THE AGENDA,
EMAIL ME AND RAYMONT WE WILL
GET TO THE AGENDA.
SOME THINGS WE HAVE COMING UP
THE VISION IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
CRASH REPORT IS THAT HAPPENING
NEXT MONTH?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I JUST GOT AN UPDATE
FROM MY TI THAT DASHBOARD IS
READY SO YES.
&gt;&gt; AWESOME PLANT ROAD
RECONFIGURATION THE LASCHET
STUDY THAT WE JUST HEARD ABOUT
AND A COUPLE OF RESOLUTIONS
FROM ME.
&gt;&gt; COOL NEXT MEETING IS
SCHEDULED FOR WEDNESDAY,
NOVEMBER 16TH AT SEVEN PM.
IT&apos;LL BE A VIRTUAL MEETING AND
IF THERE ARE NO OBJECTIONS WE
WILL ADJOURN TONIGHT&apos;S MEETING
.
I&apos;M NOT SEEING ANY OBJECTIONS.
THANK YOU ALL SO MUCH FOR
STAYING ON ESPECIALLY
ALL THE
STAFF WHO STUCK WITH US
TONIGHT.
I REALLY APPRECIATE IT.
HAVE GOOD NIGHT EVERYONE.
&gt;&gt; THANKS EVERYBODY HERE.
GOOD NIGHT